GNU remotecontrol
1 Overview
2 Scope
  2.1 Information Technology
  2.2 Energy Management
  2.3 End User
  2.4 Financial Management
3 Key Principles
  3.1 Present Capabilities
  3.2 HVAC Thermostat
  3.3 Thinking by Talking
  3.4 Choosing Decision Makers
    3.4.1 HVAC
    3.4.2 Information Technology
    3.4.3 Conclusion
  3.5 Security Considerations
    3.5.1 Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
    3.5.2 Industrial Control System
    3.5.3 System Administration-Audit-Network Security
  3.6 Frequently Asked Questions
    3.6.1 Why do we call it GNU remotecontrol?
    3.6.2 Why do I need GNU remotecontrol?
    3.6.3 How do I know who changed what?
    3.6.4 What will GNU remotecontrol do for me?
    3.6.5 Can I figure my energy usage for my HVAC units?
    3.6.6 How do I use GNU remotecontrol?
    3.6.7 Can I use GNU remotecontrol and Remote Monitoring Server together?
    3.6.8 What about the weather, can I tie weather related data into GNU remotecontrol and Remote Monitoring Server?
    3.6.9 Mobile access for GNU remotecontrol?
    3.6.10 Do I need to install anything to my computer?
    3.6.11 How many different users will be able to use GNU remotecontrol?
    3.6.12 Encryption.....is GNU remotecontrol safe to use with my network?
    3.6.13 Is GNU remotecontrol compatible with BACnet?
    3.6.14 Can I use GNU remotecontrol to help Test and Balance my HVAC system?
  3.7 Future Capabilities
4 GNU remotecontrol and BACnet
  4.1 Introduction
  4.2 Associated Specifications
  4.3 Going Forward
5 Tax Benefit
6 System Architecture and Concepts
  6.1 Web Server
    6.1.1 Security Model
    6.1.2 Requirements
    6.1.3 Options
    6.1.4 Configuration
  6.2 Database Server
    6.2.1 Security Model
    6.2.2 Requirements
    6.2.3 Configuration
  6.3 Remote Monitoring Server
    6.3.1 Security Model
    6.3.2 Requirements
    6.3.3 Options
    6.3.4 Configuration
  6.4 Nagios Plugins
    6.4.1 Proliphix Alarms
    6.4.2 Thermostat Plugin - check_ubicom
      6.4.2.1 Syntax Example - IMPERIAL
      6.4.2.2 Result Example - IMPERIAL
      6.4.2.3 Syntax Example - METRIC
      6.4.2.4 Result Example - METRIC
      6.4.2.5 Syntax Example - Macro
    6.4.3 Weather Plugin - check_weather
      6.4.3.1 Syntax Example - IMPERIAL
      6.4.3.2 Result Example - IMPERIAL
      6.4.3.3 Syntax Example - METRIC
      6.4.3.4 Result Example - METRIC
      6.4.3.5 Syntax Example - Macro
    6.4.4 Forecast Plugin - check_forecast
      6.4.4.1 Syntax Example - IMPERIAL
      6.4.4.2 Result Example - IMPERIAL
      6.4.4.3 Syntax Example - METRIC
      6.4.4.4 Result Example - METRIC
      6.4.4.5 Syntax Example - Macro
  6.5 Email Server
    6.5.1 Security Model
    6.5.2 Requirements
    6.5.3 Options
    6.5.4 Configuration
  6.6 Frequently Asked Questions
    6.6.1 What is RMS?
    6.6.2 What is Remote Monitoring Server?
    6.6.3 Why do I need RMS?
    6.6.4 What will RMS do for me?
    6.6.5 How do I use RMS?
    6.6.6 Does a Remote Monitoring Server do graphing?
    6.6.7 Mobile access for RMS?
    6.6.8 Is it difficult to use RMS?
    6.6.9 How many emails or SMS messages will I get?
    6.6.10 How many different email addresses will you send me notifications to?
    6.6.11 Can I use RMS to help Test and Balance my HVAC system?
    6.6.12 Do I need RMS?
    6.6.13 Really, how do I know that I need RMS?
7 Usage Instructions
  7.1 Browser Selection
  7.2 Time
  7.3 Menu Structure
    7.3.1 Main Menu
    7.3.2 Language Admin Menu
    7.3.3 Admin Menu
    7.3.4 User Types
  7.4 home.php
    7.4.1 Purpose
    7.4.2 Fields
    7.4.3 All Available Fields
    7.4.4 Usage
      7.4.4.1 Object Parameters
  7.5 history.php
    7.5.1 Purpose
    7.5.2 Fields
    7.5.3 All Available Fields
    7.5.4 Usage
  7.6 user-settings.php
    7.6.1 Purpose
    7.6.2 Fields
    7.6.3 Usage
  7.7 intl-home.php
    7.7.1 Purpose
    7.7.2 Usage
  7.8 intl-language-list.php
    7.8.1 Purpose
    7.8.2 All Available Fields
    7.8.3 Usage
  7.9 intl-language-add.php
    7.9.1 Purpose
    7.9.2 Usage
  7.10 intl-message-list.php
    7.10.1 Purpose
    7.10.2 All Available Fields
    7.10.3 Usage
  7.11 intl-context-list.php
    7.11.1 Purpose
    7.11.2 All Available Fields
    7.11.3 Usage
  7.12 intl-help.php
    7.12.1 Purpose
    7.12.2 Usage
  7.13 admin-home.php
    7.13.1 Purpose
    7.13.2 Fields
    7.13.3 Usage
  7.14 admin-location.php
    7.14.1 Purpose
    7.14.2 Fields
    7.14.3 All Available Fields
    7.14.4 Usage
  7.15 admin-group.php
    7.15.1 Purpose
    7.15.2 Fields
    7.15.3 All Available Fields
    7.15.4 Usage
  7.16 admin-user.php
    7.16.1 Purpose
    7.16.2 Fields
    7.16.3 All Available Fields
    7.16.4 Usage
  7.17 admin-exception-list.php
    7.17.1 Purpose
    7.17.2 Fields
    7.17.3 All Available Fields
    7.17.4 Usage
  7.18 admin-thermostat.php
    7.18.1 Purpose
    7.18.2 Fields
    7.18.3 Usage
  7.19 admin-undelete.php
    7.19.1 Purpose
    7.19.2 Fields
    7.19.3 All Available Fields
    7.19.4 Usage
  7.20 admin-time.php
    7.20.1 Purpose
    7.20.2 Usage
  7.21 admin-config.php
    7.21.1 Purpose
    7.21.2 Fields
    7.21.3 Usage
  7.22 Troubleshooting
8 Usage Recommendations
  8.1 Start Small
  8.2 Strongly Encouraged
  8.3 Food for Thought
9 Use Case Scenarios
  9.1 Scenario 1 - Building Maintenance
  9.2 Scenario 2 - Office Worker
  9.3 Scenario 3 - Property Manager
  9.4 Scenario 4 - Restaurant Operations
  9.5 Scenario 5 - Certified Energy Manager
  9.6 Scenario 6 - Industrial Manufacturing Facility
  9.7 Scenario 7 - Facility Manager
  9.8 Scenario 8 - External Information
  9.9 Scenario 9 - Financial Manager
  9.10 Scenario 10 - Automated Meter Reading
  9.11 Scenario 11 - Smart Metering
  9.12 Scenario 12 - Utility Providers
  9.13 Summary
10 Implementation Cost
11 Roadmap
  11.1 Interoperability
  11.2 HVAC Original Equipment Manufacturer - Feature Addition
  11.3 HVAC Aftermarket Equipment Manufacturer - Feature Addition
  11.4 Cost Benefit Analysis
12 REFERENCE
  12.1 Cabling 101
    12.1.1 Introduction
    12.1.2 Cable
    12.1.3 Grounding
    12.1.4 Installation
    12.1.5 Termination
    12.1.6 Testing
    12.1.7 Usage Notes
    12.1.8 Cautionary
  12.2 Power over Ethernet (PoE) 101
    12.2.1 Introduction
    12.2.2 Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE)
    12.2.3 Powered Device (PD)
    12.2.4 Midspan
    12.2.5 Endspan
    12.2.6 Usage Notes
    12.2.7 Cautionary
13 Contributors
Appendix A GNU Free Documentation License
GNU remotecontrol
*****************

This manual is for GNU remotecontrol (version 2.0, 22 April 2016).

1 Overview
**********

GNU remotecontrol is a web application serving as a management tool for
multiple IP enabled HVAC thermostat devices and other Building
Automation devices.  The purpose of GNU remotecontrol is to read from
and write to multiple IP enabled thermostat devices all at one time.

   The GNU remotecontrol framework is designed to work with any IP
enabled HVAC thermostat, but can be easily developed to operate any
number of networked devices.  This framework is built with cURL
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CURL), PHP
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PHP), and MySQL
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MySQL).  This system architecture is
enabled on a server-client principle, where users can login to the
server using a web browser to manage multiple remote devices from a
single web interface.  The GNU remotecontrol framework was developed to
work in combination with a Remote Monitoring Server, which monitors
configurable device parameters and can generate automatic system
responses and alerts.  GNU remotecontrol is both scalable and
distributable over multiple computers serving different roles in the
HVAC or remote device management framework.  The Proliphix
(http://www.proliphix.com/) thermostat (currently the only true IP
enabled HVAC thermostat on the market) was used to develop the GNU
remotecontrol web application.  The Application Programming Interface
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_programming_interface) (API)
*Proliphix IP Devices HTTP API, Revision 1.8* is used to read from and
write to the Object Identification (OID) numbers defined in the
Proliphix API for the Proliphix HVAC thermostat device.

   We identify anytime we do not adhere to the Proliphix API
instructions with the text...*THIS IS A DEVIATION TO THE PROLIPHIX
API*...in GNU remotecontrol user manual.  The only time we deviate from
the Proliphix API is when there is a critical thermostat device firmware
deficiency.  Otherwise, the Proliphix API instructions are strictly
followed by GNU remotecontrol.

   GNU remotecontrol is now designed and built using the
Model-View-Controller
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller)
(MVC) software architectural pattern.  The benefit is to provide easier
code reusability and pave the way for *U*nattended *S*erver *S*ide
*A*utomation (*USSA* or *U-S-S-A*). The automation is intended to
replace repetitive actions in your day-to-day usage of GNU
remotecontrol.  Examples of such repetition are setting the time on all
thermostat devices, or interfacing with an external system such as
another Energy Management System.  The benefit is to free you of most,
if not all, human interaction necessary to operate your GNU
remotecontrol implementation.

   GNU remotecontrol is now designed and built using a standard
Data-Access Layer (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_access_layer) (DAL)
interface via the PHP Data Objects
(http://php.net/manual/en/intro.pdo.php) (PDO). This construct supports
the GNU remotecontrol MySQL database using the PDO data access
components.  The DAL can easily mature to support other types of
databases or data access components.

   There are two significant enhancements to the setup of GNU
remotecontrol.  First, there is scripting to setup the GNU remotecontrol
database.  Second, there is a single configuration file to connect your
PHP to your MySQL for using GNU remotecontrol along with other settings
necessary for GNU remotecontrol.  These two enhancements greatly ease
GNU remotecontrol configuration and operation.

   The intended structure of this documentation is to help you achieve
an understanding of *why* you need or want to use GNU remotecontrol and
instruction for *how* to use GNU remotecontrol.  Our research during the
development of GNU remotecontrol found users operated best when they
were given the opportunity to gain a high-level understanding of all the
technologies associated with GNU remotecontrol.  This documentation is
written as a combined reference manual and technical manual for GNU
remotecontrol.  The *Scope* section contains a listing of the minimum
recommended chapter reading, per user role.  Each section in *System
Architecture and Concepts* contains instructions for *Security Model*,
any *Options* recommended, *Requirements* to run the technology, and
*Configuration* of the technology.

   We recognize this documentation contains a lot of material.  The
documentation is segmented for you to select what you need to read to
quickly and easily learn about and start using GNU remotecontrol.  It is
our hope you find this documentation contains all of the information you
need to successfully and effortlessly use GNU remotecontrol.  We now
gladly give you the latest version of GNU remotecontrol.

2 Scope
*******

The scope of this documentation is to address the three roles
(functional disciplines) who interact daily in the usage of GNU
remotecontrol; *Information Technology*, *Energy Management*, and *End
User*.  A fourth role, *Financial Management*, is a role which operates
in the Cost Benefit Analysis
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost%E2%80%93benefit_analysis) and in
reviews to evaluate facility improvement opportunities.  The
documentation contains information pertinent to each role.  The intended
end result is to help equip each role with the necessary definitions and
reference information to further high-level communication among the
roles.

   The following list is the minimum recommended chapter reading, per
role.

2.1 Information Technology
==========================

   * *Note Key Principles::.
   * *Note System Architecture and Concepts::.
   * *Note Usage Instructions::.
   * *Note Usage Recommendations::.

2.2 Energy Management
=====================

   * *Note Key Principles::.
   * *Note GNU remotecontrol and BACnet::.
   * *Note Tax Benefit::.
   * *Note System Architecture and Concepts::.
   * *Note Usage Instructions::.
   * *Note Usage Recommendations::.
   * *Note Use Case Scenarios::.
   * *Note Implementation Cost::.
   * *Note Roadmap::.
   * *Note REFERENCE::.

2.3 End User
============

   * *Note Key Principles::.
   * *Note Usage Instructions::.
   * *Note Usage Recommendations::.
   * *Note Use Case Scenarios::.

2.4 Financial Management
========================

   * *Note Key Principles::.
   * *Note GNU remotecontrol and BACnet::.
   * *Note Tax Benefit::.
   * *Note System Architecture and Concepts::.
   * *Note Usage Instructions::.
   * *Note Usage Recommendations::.
   * *Note Use Case Scenarios::.
   * *Note Implementation Cost::.
   * *Note Roadmap::.
   * *Note REFERENCE::.

3 Key Principles
****************

3.1 Present Capabilities
========================

GNU remotecontrol is designed to substantially reduce the time and
effort necessary to remotely manage multiple thermostat devices, while
significantly increasing your productivity through its many useful and
time saving features.  The User Interface is no more difficult than
using any other web application involving simple check boxes and
pull-down menus.  GNU remotecontrol, combined with the Remote Monitoring
Server, work together as a complete HVAC Energy Management system.  GNU
remotecontrol more than pays for itself by saving time and effort in
manual labor for managing all resources individually.....and then some.

3.2 HVAC Thermostat
===================

It is necessary to understand the design and usage intent of the HVAC
thermostat to fully grasp the design and usage intent of GNU
remotecontrol.

   The HVAC thermostat (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermostat) device
is often a combination of either a relay
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relay) or a semiconductor device
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_device) to have circuits
either opened or closed, to switch the device either off or on.
Examples of this functionality include heating, cooling, or a fan.  The
addition of a scheduling option to turn any of these items off or on at
a certain time does make it more practical of a device in terms of
managing day-to-day operation of any HVAC system.  Adding in the ability
to track run time duration for heating, cooling, or a fan help energy
efficiency measurements.  The final addition of remote access, through
the traditional IP enabled data network, takes the HVAC thermostat to an
interconnected device capable of multiple read and write operating
functions.  The cable from the thermostat to the HVAC equipment is solid
core 18-AWG (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_wire_gauge), either 4
or 8 separately jacketed wires, depending on system capability, all
contained within a protective jacket.

3.3 Thinking by Talking
=======================

GNU remotecontrol is here to help you make your Energy Management
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_management) strategy easier and
more productive.  GNU remotecontrol is here to help simplify your life,
not make it more complicated.  Contact
(https://savannah.gnu.org/mail/?group=remotecontrol) the mailing list if
you are stuck or cannot figure out the best option for your GNU
remotecontrol framework.  The chances are the answer you need is
something we have already worked through.  We would be happy to help you
by discussing your situation with you.

3.4 Choosing Decision Makers
============================

You will most likely need to work with others who have a different skill
set than you do to develop and implement an effective Energy Management
strategy.  It is necessary to carefully plan for your selection of the
decision makers you choose to work with on your team.  Choosing decision
makers capable to run your HVAC and IT systems is paramount to the
success of your system performance.

3.4.1 HVAC
----------

Being a licensed Professional Engineer
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Professional_engineer) does not make the
person a Certified Energy Manager (http://www.aeecenter.org/cem/) (CEM).
They are separate qualifications, each with their own requirements.  The
titles associated with Energy Engineering
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_engineering) are broad.  Go with a
Certified Energy Manager to help you determine if you qualify for any
tax benefit for commercial building being rated as energy efficient.
Even if you don't qualify for a tax benefit, it is highly likely you
will find a beneficial set of methods to increase your Energy Management
strategies which makes paying the Certified Energy Manager well worth
the expense.

3.4.2 Information Technology
----------------------------

Serving in an IT role does not necessarily make one qualified do an
end-to-end design of an IT system.  Relevant certifications help to know
if one is capable to do what they say they can do.  Experience is
probably the strongest credential one can have for being capable to run
an IT system.  Simply put, operation does not equal design.  They are
separate qualifications, each with their own requirements.

3.4.3 Conclusion
----------------

Look to your *Cost Benefit Analysis* for decision making on how you need
to design and operate your Energy Management strategy.

3.5 Security Considerations
===========================

The following is a list of links to information which will greatly help
you plan for the network implementation and configuration of your Energy
Management strategy.

3.5.1 Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition
----------------------------------------------

SCADA (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SCADA) speaks to the industrial side
of HVAC automation.

3.5.2 Industrial Control System
-------------------------------

ICS (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_Control_Systems) speaks to
industrial production facilities.

3.5.3 System Administration-Audit-Network Security
--------------------------------------------------

SANS (http://www.sans.org/) specializes in Internet Security training.

3.6 Frequently Asked Questions
==============================

3.6.1 Why do we call it GNU remotecontrol?
------------------------------------------

This code was originally called *JUT*....."*J*ust *U*se *T*his" to
represent the intention of this software automation to take the
complicated and make it very, very simple, from a user perspective.  The
name changed to GNU remotecontrol, when code was released under the GNU
license.

3.6.2 Why do I need GNU remotecontrol?
--------------------------------------

If you have thermostat devices, you know it takes time and effort to
keep your energy usage down and control your climate for your comfort.
This time and effort is increased with each remote device or HVAC unit
you want to administrate.  GNU remotecontrol helps you spend less time
and effort administrating your thermostat devices, provides automated
record keeping of what changed, who changed it, and when it was changed.
GNU remotecontrol deployment helps keep your energy usage as low as
possible.

3.6.3 How do I know who changed what?
-------------------------------------

Review the access logs you have enabled for your Web Server, your
Operating System, and all of the other technologies which achieve user
validation of a web application.  Technologies time tested, tried and
true, which you can count on.  No need to reinvent the wheel, use what
works well when possible.

3.6.4 What will GNU remotecontrol do for me?
--------------------------------------------

Free up your time and effort for starters.  Also, enable you to know who
did what to your thermostat devices when GNU remotecontrol was used to
change your thermostat devices.  Finally, your GNU remotecontrol
application can help you minimize your energy costs.

3.6.5 Can I figure my energy usage for my HVAC units?
-----------------------------------------------------

The IP enabled thermostat will greatly help with this measurement.

3.6.6 How do I use GNU remotecontrol?
-------------------------------------

Pretty easy, actually.  Select the thermostat devices you want to change
the settings of.....make the change.....and that's it.  You can easily
see the time and effort you save changing the air conditioning from 75oF
to 73oF for several thermostat devices, all at once!  Then, imagine
changing your setback schedule somehow on top of that, for say thirty
different thermostat devices, all at once!

3.6.7 Can I use GNU remotecontrol and Remote Monitoring Server together?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Oh, yes.  Think of GNU remotecontrol as writing to your thermostat
devices while a Remote Monitoring Server reading information about your
thermostat devices.  The two go hand in hand.  They are intended to work
together.

3.6.8 What about the weather, can I tie weather related data into GNU remotecontrol and Remote Monitoring Server?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes.  Use your Remote Monitoring Server to collect information about the
weather from International Weather Services for the location of your
thermostat device.  This approach will tell you a great deal about the
quality of your Energy Management strategy.

3.6.9 Mobile access for GNU remotecontrol?
------------------------------------------

Yes, you can access GNU remotecontrol using your cell phone Internet
browser.

3.6.10 Do I need to install anything to my computer?
----------------------------------------------------

No.  GNU remotecontrol is a WC3 (http://www.w3.org/standards/) compliant
web application.  More times than not, your network is ready to go
as-is.

3.6.11 How many different users will be able to use GNU remotecontrol?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

You can set up different user accounts, but the nature of a thermostat
device means the people touching it be extremely clear with each other
as to how they want to set the thermostat device.

3.6.12 Encryption.....is GNU remotecontrol safe to use with my network?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

We recommend you use a High Grade (AES-256 bit) encryption to secure the
connection from your computer to your GNU remotecontrol server and
verify the identity of your server with your own signed SSL Certificate.
The connection from your computer to your thermostat device is not
changed from your normal connection to your Proliphix thermostat device.

3.6.13 Is GNU remotecontrol compatible with BACnet?
---------------------------------------------------

Yes.  *Note GNU remotecontrol and BACnet::.

3.6.14 Can I use GNU remotecontrol to help Test and Balance my HVAC system?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Yes.  Remote Monitoring Server and GNU remotecontrol work together to
help you do just this.  Recorded data of your HVAC system's usage and
outdoor weather information is priceless for testing and balancing.  The
review of recorded data offers considerable cost savings, in both time
and effort, when optimizing your system setup.  Additionally, you can
reduce the number of people necessary to do the testing and balancing
down to one person.

3.7 Future Capabilities
=======================

The next logical step is to expand GNU remotecontrol and become
certified with industrial HVAC, lighting control, access control, and
fire detection technologies.  The BACnet communication protocol is an
excellent candidate for connection to the GNU remotecontrol framework.
*Note GNU remotecontrol and BACnet::.  The MODBUS
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modbus) communication protocol may also be
implemented at a future date, but demand for this capability enhancement
is not clearly understood.

4 GNU remotecontrol and BACnet
******************************

4.1 Introduction
================

The BACnet (http://www.bacnet.org/) data communication protocol, for
Building Automation and Control Networks, was developed by ASHRAE
(http://www.ashrae.org/), the building technology society.  The
intention is to enable interoperability between automation and control
systems by different vendors used in the building industry.

4.2 Associated Specifications
=============================

BACnet conformance requires a *P*rotocol *I*mplementation *C*onformance
*S*tatement (PICS) (http://www.bacnet.org/DL-Docs/), which GNU
remotecontrol does not currently have.  This is because we have no user
requests to develop GNU remotecontrol in this direction.  However, the
PHP code can be adapted to utilize the XML language to effect
communication with BACnet systems and compliant devices.  GNU
remotecontrol is capable of processing packets comprising the BACnet
model and its Object types, by utilizing PHP code to parse the data and
handle inputs and outputs and network communications as BACnet requires.

4.3 Going Forward
=================

The roadmap of GNU remotecontrol is a commitment to International
standards and protocols for Information Technology to provide
availability, relevance, transparency, and maintenance of the GNU
remotecontrol framework.  (*Note Roadmap::.)  The BACnet XML Working
Group (http://www.bacnet.org/WG/XML/index.html) is an excellent example
of these attributes.

5 Tax Benefit
*************

Internal Revenue Bulletin: 2006-26
(http://www.irs.gov/irb/2006-26_IRB/ar11.html), *Notice 2006-52*,
_Deduction for Energy Efficient Commercial Buildings_ defines the tax
deduction allowed for the hardware and software required for GNU
remotecontrol to operate in commercial buildings in the United States.
The costs for GNU remotecontrol are 100% tax deductible.....if you meet
these requirements.  The tax deduction, combined with spending less
money for energy due to an improved Energy Management strategies, means
GNU remotecontrol more than pays for itself.

6 System Architecture and Concepts
**********************************

The following pieces of the GNU remotecontrol architecture are
*necessary*:
   * Web Server
   * Database Server

   The following pieces of the GNU remotecontrol architecture are
*optional*:
   * Remote Monitoring Server
   * Email Server

   The following versions for the GNU remotecontrol architecture are
*required*:
   * PHP 5.3.10
   * php5-curl 5.3.10
   * php5-mysql 5.3.10
   * MySQL-server 5.5.46
   * mysql_tzinfo_to_sql
     (http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/mysql-tzinfo-to-sql.html) -
     The mysql_tzinfo_to_sql command is installed along with mysql.  It
     is necessary to run this command to use GNU remotecontrol, even if
     your mysql database schema already has the time zone tables.

   An abbreviated set of installation instructions for GNU remotecontrol
as a whole is available in the *INSTALL.md* file, located in the
'/PATH-TO-YOUR-SVN/remotecontrol/doc/' directory.

6.1 Web Server
==============

Please make certain you have the *required* software versions, as listed
in the beginning of this section.

6.1.1 Security Model
--------------------

GNU remotecontrol is configured with the minimum level of security
necessary for a Web Server (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_server).
You are responsible for setting up your security on your Web Server.

6.1.2 Requirements
------------------

GNU remotecontrol can operate on any platform capable of running PHP
with cURL and MySQL. GNU remotecontrol works with either Basic
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basic_access_authentication) or Digest
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digest_access_authentication)
authentication.  GNU remotecontrol works with either Apache mod_PHP
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Apache_modules) or FastCGI Process
Manager (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PHP#PHPFPM).  Follow the
requirements stated by the Web Server you so choose to use.

6.1.3 Options
-------------

GNU remotecontrol runs without any known problems on Apache
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apache_HTTP_Server), Nginx
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nginx), and IIS
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Information_Services).  Running
GNU remotecontrol on a lightweight
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_lightweight_web_servers) Web
Server versus a complete
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_web_servers) Web Server is
possible, but not recommended.  This is due to the security benefits of
a complete Web Server.  Again, you are responsible for setting up your
security on your Web Server.

6.1.4 Configuration
-------------------

GNU remotecontrol is configured within the *config.example.php* file.
This file is located in the '/PATH-TO-YOUR-SVN/remotecontrol/'
directory.  Copy *config.example.php* to *config.php*.  This file
contains all necessary parameters to connect your Web Server to your
Database Server, after you have initially installed and configured each
server.

   GNU remotecontrol will not work with anonymous users.  This is
because of how GNU remotecontrol is designed and for security purposes.
You must add at least a single user in your GNU remotecontrol database,
which is checked against an identically named user account configured in
your website.  GNU remotecontrol authentication is aligned with Web
Server authentication, by keeping user names between the two identical.
Follow the requirements stated by the Web Server you so choose to use.

   Here is what you need to run GNU remotecontrol on Apache, *after* you
setup your security on your Web Server.

   * *Apache sites-configuration:*

     	DocumentRoot /var/www/remotecontrol
     	<Directory /var/www/remotecontrol>
     		Options FollowSymLinks -Indexes
     		AllowOverride None
     		Order allow,deny
     		allow from all
     	</Directory>

     	<Location />
     		AuthType Basic
     		AuthName "GNU remotecontrol v2.0 - USER AUTHENTICATION REQUIRED"
     		AuthUserFile /etc/apache2/.remotecontrol_passwd
     		Require user tstat_admin tstat_test_user_1 tstat_test_user_2
     	</Location>

   * *Settings necessary in your PHP configuration (php.ini):*
     	register_globals = Off

     	auto_globals_jit = On


6.2 Database Server
===================

Please make certain you have the *required* software versions, as listed
in the beginning of this section.

6.2.1 Security Model
--------------------

GNU remotecontrol is configured with the minimum level of security
necessary for a Database System
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_system).  You are responsible for
setting up your security on your Database Server.

6.2.2 Requirements
------------------

GNU remotecontrol runs without any known problems on MySQL. Running GNU
remotecontrol on a lightweight
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Back-end_database#Small_Database_Systems)
Database Server versus a complete
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_relational_database_management_systems)
Database Server is possible, but not recommended.  This is due to the
security benefits of a complete Database Server.  Again, you are
responsible for setting up your security on your Database Server.
Follow the requirements stated by the Database System you so choose to
use.

6.2.3 Configuration
-------------------

There are both complete and partial automation options available to
setup your GNU remotecontrol database.  The files for these options are
located in the '/PATH-TO-YOUR-SVN/remotecontrol/dbscripts/' directory.
The complete automation option is an all-inclusive interactive script
called *make-db.sh*.  The partial automation option is the same
all-inclusive script broken into individual *SQL* scripts.  Follow the
requirements stated by the Database System you so choose to use.

   Command-line arguments for the *make-db.sh* file are sequential:

  1. The database name.
  2. The database user.
  3. The database user password.
  4. The option to load the test data?  'y' for yes, 'n' for no
  5. The password for the root account of your MySQL installation.

   Execute the individual SQL scripts in the following order:

  1. *gnurc-db.sql*, to create a default database called *gnurc*.
  2. *gnurc-schema.sql*, to create the database schema.
  3. *gnurc-data.sql*, to load global/default data.
  4. *gnurc-test.sql*, to load test data.

   The *README.md* file in this same directory contains abbreviated
instructions to setup your GNU remotecontrol database.  Again, an
abbreviated set of installation instructions for GNU remotecontrol as a
whole is available in the *INSTALL.md* file, located in the
'/PATH-TO-YOUR-SVN/remotecontrol/doc/' directory.

6.3 Remote Monitoring Server
============================

Please make certain you have the *required* software versions, as listed
in the beginning of this section.

6.3.1 Security Model
--------------------

GNU remotecontrol is configured with the minimum level of security
necessary for a Remote Monitoring
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_monitoring) application.  You are
responsible for setting up your security on your Remote Monitoring
Server.

6.3.2 Requirements
------------------

Follow the requirements stated by the Remote Monitoring application you
so choose to use.

6.3.3 Options
-------------

The question must be answered.....*why would you not monitor your
systems*?  This is not a judgemental question, simply framing the
context of this section.  This section has a list of *Frequently Asked
Questions*, at the end.  If your answer brings you peace of mind to not
have a Remote Monitoring Server, so be it.  Perhaps you trust the
decisions and work of others enough to not bother with setting up a
Remote Monitoring Server.  That is often a poor choice.

   Running a Remote Monitoring Server is the easy part of having a
Remote Monitoring Server.  The biggest decision you have to make
is.....*are you going to run it, or is someone else*?  Then, and only
then, choose the technology combination you want to have for your Remote
Monitoring Server.  Do not let your skill set alone decide what is best
for meeting your needs.  Determine what you needs are, count the cost,
and then choose your technology.

   *Popular Options*

   * Nagios (http://www.nagios.org/)
   * Solar Winds (http://www.solarwinds.com/)
   * M/Monit (http://www.mmonit.com/)

     Note: There are many, many other options to choose.

   We have developed plugins for Nagios to round out the Energy
Management strategy.  Check out the *Nagios Plugins*.

6.3.4 Configuration
-------------------

Follow the requirements stated by the Remote Monitoring application you
so choose to use.

6.4 Nagios Plugins
==================

We developed a complementary set of plugins
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plug-in_%28computing%29) to round out the
GNU remotecontrol Architecture.  The plugins can be implemented either
individually or collectively.  We developed our plugins in accordance
with the Nagios Plugin Development Guidelines
(https://nagios-plugins.org/doc/guidelines.html).  The function of these
plugins is to capture and process numerical characters from data
obtained from your IP enabled thermostat device and RSS
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSS) or JSON
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON) feeds for weather information out of
doors.  The measurements of Temperature
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temperature), Humidity
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humidity), Wind-Speed
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_speed), Wind-Chill
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_chill), and Atmospheric (Barometric)
Pressure (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barometric_pressure) help to
analyze your entire HVAC system and determine if your Energy Management
strategy is working for you.  Other measurements can be added in as
preferred, as shared below.

6.4.1 Proliphix Alarms
----------------------

The need for the *Thermostat Plugin - check_ubicom* is better understood
when the limitations of the native Proliphix alarms are examined.  The
Proliphix thermostat device has four alarms.
   * Low Temperature
   * High Temperature
   * High Humidity
   * Filter Change

   Alarms in the thermostat device were considered for displaying in GNU
remotecontrol *home.php* or another web page not yet developed (perhaps
something like a GNU remotecontrol alarms.php web page).  Feedback from
users during development of GNU remotecontrol showed their preference is
to be informed of alarms from a Remote Monitoring Server notification.
This approach also provides logging of all monitored information, a
feature not available in the thermostat device itself.

   The Temperature and Humidity alarms are already provided for in the
Nagios checks we have developed.  The Filter Change alarm has various
pre-determined options to select; 10, 30, 60, 90, 120, 240, 365 Runtime
Days.  This does not account for dust accumulating on a filter, should
the power be turned off to the thermostat device.  This logic
combination is determined as insufficient to use for monitoring when to
change the filter of any HVAC system.  Reasoning for this determination
includes:
   * Various pollutants enter filters at different times in different
     ways.
   * Allergens are more prevalent in the Spring compared to the other
     seasons of the year.
   * Dust is more common if a manufacturing facility has dust as a
     by-product of manufacturing.
   * Dust is generated from Wood Stoves and Fire Places.  Heating needs
     often change throughout the year.
   * Dust Storms (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dust_storm) are common in
     arid and semi-arid regions.  Dust Storms require additional filter
     inspections to make sure equipment will not be damaged from
     improper ventilation.
   * An end-user is the best person to determine when to change a filter
     based upon the environmental conditions which may or may not
     change.

   The Proliphix API only supports reading these alarms, not setting an
alarm threshold or resetting an alarm event.  The user must go to the
web page within the Proliphix thermostat device for setting an alarm
threshold or resetting an alarm event.  Also, there is only a single
alarm issued per alarm type until the alarm type event is reset in the
thermostat device.  This logic combination means a threshold may be
exceeded, return to an acceptable level for the user, and then be
exceeded again.  This example is an excellent illustration of the value
gained by having a Remote Motoring Server, with its fully configurable
and flexible alarm functionality, watching your network, your devices,
and anything else you can monitor.

   Finally, since the thermostat device has a threshold of how many read
events the unit can support per minute, we did not want to overwhelm the
device with multiple read events.  An example of this overwhelming of
the device is:
  1. Having a separate web page, somewhere, for viewing these alarms,
     after they are read from the thermostat device.
  2. Then, returning to the GNU remotecontrol *home.php* web page, to
     see those alarms.....again.
  3. Then, going into the thermostat device web page, to clear the alarm
     or adjust thresholds.
  4. Then, going back to the GNU remotecontrol *home.php* web page, to
     see what an alarm reads.
  5. Then, going back into the separate web page, somewhere, to see what
     an alarm reads.

   The Proliphix API is quite distinct about this cautioning of too many
read events per minute through the Proliphix API. The combination of the
web server of the thermostat device and GNU remotecontrol *home.php* is
a proper approach to use and not overwhelm the thermostat device.  This
approach caches the data and avoids repeated Proliphix API calls to the
Proliphix HVAC thermostat device.

6.4.2 Thermostat Plugin - check_ubicom
--------------------------------------

Please review the documentation provided with the plugin source code for
detailed usage instructions.  The following is an outline of the
detailed instruction.

   This plugin will attempt to read temperature and humidity from a
thermostat device.  Successful reads initially set the response to
'STATE_OK'.  If the temperature or humidity falls outside the range set
by the 'warn-temperature' or the 'warn-humidity' arguments, then the
response is upgraded to 'STATE_WARNING'.  If the temperature or humidity
falls outside the range set by the 'critical-temperature' or the
'critical-humidity' arguments, then the response is further upgraded to
'STATE_CRITICAL'.  Failure to read both values, due to either a timeout
or parsing failure, results in a 'STATE_UNKNOWN' response.

6.4.2.1 Syntax Example - IMPERIAL
.................................

'check_ubicom! -wt :70 -ct :90 -wh 10: -ch 5: -t 60 -I
example.remote-mon.com -u /status.shtml'

   * [-H <HOSTNAME|HOSTNAME:PORT>] =
     [-hostname=<HOSTNAME|HOSTNAME:PORT>] = Hostname for virtual-hosting
     or shared hosting servers.  Append the port number to include it in
     the header (e.g.: example.remote-mon.com:80).
   * [-I <IP ADDRESS|HOSTNAME>] = [-IP-address=<IP ADDRESS|HOSTNAME>] =
     IP address or hostname to use for TCP socket connection.
   * [-S] = [-ssl] = Connect via SSL. The port defaults to 443.
   * [-p <PORT>] = [-port=<PORT>] = Numeric port number to use for TCP
     socket connection.
   * [-u <PATH>] = [-url=<PATH>] = URL to GET (/status.shtml)
   * [-a <USER:PASS>] = [-authorization=<USER:PASS>] = username and
     password pair for sites with basic authentication.
   * [-A <STRING>] = [-useragent=<STRING>] = User-Agent header string.
     ("check_ubicom/v1")
   * [-t <SECONDS>] = [-timeout <SECONDS>] = Maximum connect time in
     seconds.  The default is 10.
   * [-m] = [-metric] = Use metric (Celsius) units for temperature
     ranges.
   * [-wt <min>:<max>] = [-warn-temperature=<min>:<max>] = Normal
     temperature range in decimal degrees.
   * [-ct <min>:<max>] = [-critical-temperature=<min>:<max>] =
     Acceptable temperature range in decimal degrees.
   * [-wh <min>:<max>] = [-warn-humidity=<min>:<max>] = Normal humidity
     range in decimal percentage points.
   * [-ch <min>:<max>] = [-critical-humidity=<min>:<max>] = Acceptable
     humidity range in decimal percentage points.

6.4.2.2 Result Example - IMPERIAL
.................................

   * Returns WARNING if temperature is above 70F or humidity is below
     10%.
   * Returns CRITICAL if temperature is above 90F or humidity is below
     5%.
   * Returns OK if temperature is 70F or below.
   * Returns UNKNOWN if no response received within 60 seconds.

6.4.2.3 Syntax Example - METRIC
...............................

'check_ubicom! -m -wt 0:30 --critical-temperature=-10:50 -I
example.remote-mon.com -u /status.shtml'

6.4.2.4 Result Example - METRIC
...............................

   * Returns WARNING if temperature is below 0C or above 30C.
   * Returns CRITICAL if temperature is below -10C or above 50C.
   * Returns OK if temperature is from 0C to 30C.
   * Returns UNKNOWN if no response received within 10 seconds.

6.4.2.5 Syntax Example - Macro
..............................

define command{
		command_name check_ubicom

		command_line $USER1$/check_ubicom -I 10.10.10.22 -p 8264
		}

6.4.3 Weather Plugin - check_weather
------------------------------------

Please review the documentation provided with the plugin source code for
detailed usage instructions.  The following is an outline of the
detailed instruction.

   The check_weather plugin checks the wind-chill, wind-speed, humidity,
pressure, and temperature received from Yahoo!  Weather RSS Feed
(http://developer.yahoo.com/weather/) for a single location.  The return
value is always either OK or UNKNOWN, as the weather feed either is or
is not accessible.

   You are certainly free to use any other feed you prefer.  Examples of
a feed include The Weather Channel (http://www.weather.com/) and Weather
Underground (http://www.wunderground.com/weather/api/).  All of these
feeds have free and paid options.  Please carefully read their
provisions if you select to use their feed.

   The performance values returned by the check_weather plugin, *in
order*, are:
  1. wind-chill (apparent temperature) in degrees F or degrees C
  2. wind-speed in m.p.h.  or km.p.h.
  3. relative humidity in percent
  4. barometric pressure in in.Hg or mm.Hg
  5. current temperature in degrees F or degrees C

6.4.3.1 Syntax Example - IMPERIAL
.................................

'check_weather! -d 23424748 -m F -w 0 -c 0'

   * -d = woeid of the location
   * -m F = imperial unit
   * -w 0 = warning limit
   * -c 0 = critical limit

6.4.3.2 Result Example - IMPERIAL
.................................

'OK|52 8 88 29.68 52'

  1. 52 degrees Fahrenheit wind-chill
  2. 8 mph wind-speed
  3. 88% relative humidity
  4. 29.7 in.Hg barometric pressure
  5. 52 degrees Fahrenheit actual temperature

6.4.3.3 Syntax Example - METRIC
...............................

'check_weather! -d 23424748 -m C -w 0 -c 0'

   * -d = woeid of the location
   * -m C = metric unit
   * -w 0 = warning limit
   * -c 0 = critical limit

6.4.3.4 Result Example - METRIC
...............................

'OK|35 12.8748 88 753.872 35'

  1. 35 degrees Celsius wind-chill temperature
  2. 12.8 km/h wind-speed
  3. 88% relative humidity
  4. 758.8 mm.Hg barometric pressure
  5. 35 degrees Celsius actual temperature

6.4.3.5 Syntax Example - Macro
..............................

define command{
		command_name check_weather

		command_line $USER1$/check_weather -d 23424748 -m F -w 0 -c 0
		}


6.4.4 Forecast Plugin - check_forecast
--------------------------------------

Please review the documentation provided with the plugin source code for
detailed usage instructions.  The following is an outline of the
detailed instruction.

   The check_forecast plugin checks the wind-chill, wind-speed,
humidity, pressure, and temperature received from Open Weather Map
(http://openweathermap.org/forecast5) for a single location.  The return
value is always either OK or UNKNOWN, as the forecast feed either is or
is not accessible.

   You are certainly free to use any other feed you prefer.  Examples of
a feed include The Weather Channel (http://www.weather.com/) and Weather
Underground (http://www.wunderground.com/weather/api/).  All of these
feeds have free and paid options.  Please carefully read their
provisions if you select to use their feed.

   The performance values returned by the check_forecast plugin, *in
order*, are:

  1. wind-chill (apparent temperature) in degrees F or degrees C
  2. wind-speed in m.p.h.  or km.p.h.
  3. relative humidity in percent
  4. barometric pressure in in.Hg or mm.Hg
  5. current temperature in degrees F or degrees C

6.4.4.1 Syntax Example - IMPERIAL
.................................

'check_forecast! -t -24.91 -n 133.4 -m F -w 0 -c 0 -a [INSERT YOUR API
KEY HERE]'

   * -t = latitude
   * -n = longitude
   * -m F = imperial unit
   * -w 0 = warning limit
   * -c 0 = critical limit
   * -a = Your API key from http://openweathermap.org/api
     (http://openweathermap.org/api)

6.4.4.2 Result Example - IMPERIAL
.................................

'OK|52 8 88 29.68 52'

  1. 52 degrees Fahrenheit wind-chill
  2. 8 mph wind-speed
  3. 88% relative humidity
  4. 29.7 in.Hg barometric pressure
  5. 52 degrees Fahrenheit actual temperature

6.4.4.3 Syntax Example - METRIC
...............................

'check_forecast! -t -24.91 -n 133.4 -m C -w 0 -c 0 -a [INSERT YOUR API
KEY HERE]'

   * -t = latitude
   * -n = longitude
   * -m C = metric unit
   * -w 0 = warning limit
   * -c 0 = critical limit
   * -a = Your API key from http://openweathermap.org/api
     (http://openweathermap.org/api)

6.4.4.4 Result Example - METRIC
...............................

'OK|35 12.8748 88 753.872 35'

  1. 35 degrees Celsius wind-chill temperature
  2. 12.8 km/h wind-speed
  3. 88% relative humidity
  4. 758.8 mm.Hg barometric pressure
  5. 35 degrees Celsius actual temperature

6.4.4.5 Syntax Example - Macro
..............................

define command{
		command_name check_forecast

		command_line $USER1$/check_forecast! -t -24.91 -n 133.4 -m F -w 0 -c 0 -a [INSERT YOUR API KEY HERE]
		}


   These plugins are developed under the Nagios License
(http://www.nagios.com/legal/).

6.5 Email Server
================

6.5.1 Security Model
--------------------

GNU remotecontrol is configured with the minimum level of security
necessary for an Email Server
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Email_server).  You are responsible for
setting up your security on your Email Server.

6.5.2 Requirements
------------------

The email send function used in the GNU remotecontrol Architecture is
for sending email from your Remote Monitoring Server to you, using SMTP
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMTP).  The mail send function will use
the server's Mail Transfer Agent (MTA
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mail_transfer_agent)).  Requirements for
High Availability of mail sending necessitate the configuration of a
secondary MTA to provide service redundancy.  You will need to have your
own registered Domain Name with its MX record
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MX_record), to be able to send email
messages directly to recipients and not be blocked by various Internet
Service Providers (ISPs), for fear of spam.  Follow the requirements
stated by the Email Server application you so choose to use with your
Remote Monitoring Server.

6.5.3 Options
-------------

Many ISPs block outgoing packets through port 25.  This occurs as a
matter of course to minimize spam.  If you ISP is blocking port 25, then
you have the option.....and is *STRONGLY RECOMMENDED* for security
purposes.....to configure your MTA to use SSL/TLS encryption when
sending messages to remote mail servers (SMTPS
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smtps)).  This configuration would
normally use a different port than port 25 for outgoing messages,
overcoming the problem of blocked port 25.  If your server is not
operating under a registered Domain Name, then you have no option but to
use a third party SMTP service offered by different ISPs (e.g.  DynDNS
Email, Gmail, et cetera) to relay messages from your Remote Monitoring
Server server to the intended recipients, via your email account on the
third party server.

   Do yourself a *big* favor and become clear on these three items:
   * Mail Delivery Agent
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mail_Delivery_Agent)
   * Mail Transfer Agent
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mail_transfer_agent) (Mail Relay)
   * Mail User Agent (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mail_user_agent)

   Then, do yourself a *huge* favor and become familiar with these four
items:
   * Email Authentication
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-mail_authentication)
   * S/MIME (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S/MIME)
   * SMTP Authentication
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMTP_Authentication)
   * Transport Layer Security
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transport_Layer_Security)

   Now, having a familiarity understanding of these items will equip you
to have a successful talk with your Email Administrator, or your
Internet Service Provider, or a Mail Relay Provider.  They will ask you
several questions about how you want email handled for your GNU
remotecontrol.  Prepare beforehand for this discussion.  The discussion
will go much better if you are familiar with and understand these items.

6.5.4 Configuration
-------------------

The Remote Monitoring Server can be configured to send notifications to
any number of different recipients.  It is advisable you configure the
access control list of your Email Server to only allow messages to be
sent from the user under which your Remote Monitoring Server is running,
as an added security precaution.  Follow the requirements stated by the
MTA application you so choose to use and the settings provided by any
third party SMTP service.

   The email you probably want to receive is that which will notify you
of a condition occurring.  You are notified by email messages sent to
you by your Remote Monitoring Server.  You do not have to keep these
email notifications after you are notified, nor do you need to set any
reports to be sent to you in more emails.  All of the information you
would ever need about notifications, alerts and their history, is being
stored on your Remote Monitoring Server, either in log files or in a
database.  The benefit of receiving an email alert is to be notified in
real time, when you need to look into an exception event to mitigate its
impact.  The benefit of this awareness is priceless.

     Note: Don't use an SMS
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_Message_Service) address when
     sending email to cell phones.  Use the cell phone's email address
     via the Free Email To SMS Gateways
     (http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/email-to-sms/).  Major United States
     Carriers offer this to both email or SMS users.  Look for the same
     options from cell phone providers where you live.  You will be much
     happier using the cell phone's email address, as you can easily
     track if the message went out or not, versus wondering about the
     SMS system.....in which knowing is often a mystery.  Finally, it is
     one less system to use.

6.6 Frequently Asked Questions
==============================

6.6.1 What is RMS?
------------------

RMS is the acronym of Remote Monitoring Server.

6.6.2 What is Remote Monitoring Server?
---------------------------------------

A Remote Monitoring Server regularly keeps track of your chosen
networked device (computers, email servers, web servers, routers,
thermostat devices, et cetera) and notifies you with alerts of any
problems when they occur.

6.6.3 Why do I need RMS?
------------------------

If you want to know the status of any IP addressable device, you need to
monitor it.  If you do not have the time or effort available to stand
there and watch the device yourself, you need something to automatically
monitor it and record the results for you to review at your leisure.
Ideally, the Remote Monitoring Server will promptly notify you of
anything occurring you have defined as a problem.  An automated
technology which remotely monitors your equipment, commonly referred to
as....._stuff_.....and alerts you when there is a problem.  This is RMS.

6.6.4 What will RMS do for me?
------------------------------

Watch your "stuff" and tell you when your "stuff" has a problem.  It
logs the results of the monitoring of your "stuff" for you to review in
a web page based format.  This approach will help you quickly figure out
if something is wrong and what is wrong with your "stuff".

6.6.5 How do I use RMS?
-----------------------

Pretty easy, actually.  Setup your Remote Monitoring Server and decide
what network and devices you want monitored.  From there, you receive an
email or SMS message to your cell phone when there is a problem.

6.6.6 Does a Remote Monitoring Server do graphing?
--------------------------------------------------

Yes, it produces graphs providing a visual indication of the
measurements taken, in configurable scale and units of measurement.

6.6.7 Mobile access for RMS?
----------------------------

Yes, you can access your RMS server using your cell phone Internet
browser.

6.6.8 Is it difficult to use RMS?
---------------------------------

No more difficult than receiving an email or SMS message when an alert
occurs.  Reports of historical events are available on the RMS served
website, which includes a summary dashboard and detailed log tables and
graphs.

6.6.9 How many emails or SMS messages will I get?
-------------------------------------------------

More than enough for you to know if and when there is a problem.  A
notification system is almost limitless in how it can be configured for
you.  A good example is not receiving all SMS message in the middle of
the night, but only the SMS messages you conclude you must have 'round
the clock.  When you receive a notification, how many times you receive
a subsequent notification for the same failure, and who receives those
notifications.....all set up as you want.

6.6.10 How many different email addresses will you send me notifications to?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Often, there is a primary and a secondary person in a monitoring
notification.  Each person has an email address and an SMS address,
receiving email or SMS notifications to each address.....as you prefer.
Or, it is sent to a Distribution List.  The combination of options are
plentiful to send email, rest assured.

6.6.11 Can I use RMS to help Test and Balance my HVAC system?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Yes.  RMS and GNU remotecontrol work together to help you do just this.
Having recorded data for your system usage and outdoors weather
information is priceless for testing and balancing.  It offers
considerable cost savings, in both time and effort, to review recorded
data to optimize your system setup.  Additionally, you can reduce the
number of people necessary to do the testing and balancing down to one
person.

6.6.12 Do I need RMS?
---------------------

Not to sound silly, but RMS prevents a mess.  It is impossible to
consciously improve anything without first measuring it.  You may
stumble upon a way to improve it, but is that a pro-active approach to
managing anything?  Of course not.  To help improve things, RMS helps by
monitoring the status your resources.  The unknown things of life can
crop in and cause problems.  The faster you know about a problem, the
faster you can stop any damage the problem may cause.  RMS helps you
take advantage of the opportunity to improve how you manage things, so
the chance of a problem returning becomes less likely.

6.6.13 Really, how do I know that I need RMS?
---------------------------------------------

If you worry about your "stuff", and your "stuff" has an IP address, you
need RMS.

7 Usage Instructions
********************

It is our hope the preceding chapters have provided you the opportunity
to gain a high-level understanding of all the technologies associated
with GNU remotecontrol.  We now need to talk about the browser you
select to use with GNU remotecontrol and emphasize the concepts of time.
Then, you are ready to learn how to use GNU remotecontrol.

7.1 Browser Selection
=====================

GNU remotecontrol works with the following browsers:

   * Firefox (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Firefox)
   * Iceweasel
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mozilla_software_rebranded_by_Debian#Iceweasel)
   * Chrome (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Chrome)
   * Chromium (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromium_%28web_browser%29)
   * Opera (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opera_browser)
   * Internet Explorer (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Explorer)

   Internet Explorer, though one of the worlds earlier graphical
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_web_browser) options for a
web browser (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_browser) and is credited
with helping to grow the Internet past text browsing
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_web_browsers), simply changes
too much and too often to deal with all of the inconsistencies of the
browser not being compliant with International Standards
(http://www.w3.org/standards/agents/browsers) of the World Wide Web.
GNU remotecontrol does work with Internet Explorer.  However, Internet
Explorer is not the recommendation for selection of a browser to use
with GNU remotecontrol.

7.2 Time
========

This section is quite important, perhaps the most important of all.  The
absence of all devices being set to the same time often results in many
problems, problems which are often catastrophic in nature.  We have
written this section to try to eliminate Clock Synchronization
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_synchronization) errors from
hindering the efficiency of your Energy Management strategy.

   The definition of Time can mean many things to many people.  We
define Time (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time) as _a dimension in which
events can be ordered from the past through the present into the future,
and the measure of durations of events and the intervals between them_.
Date is a collection of time.  Daylight Savings Time
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time) is the most common
occurrence of Time Change (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_change).
Time Dilation (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_dilation) is not a
problem with HVAC operation, nor is the Hafele Keating Effect
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hafele%E2%80%93Keating_experiment), as the
facility is not traveling.

   Examples of how time differences can cause damage and harm people are
in a manufacturing facility
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time#Complexity) and while
using medical equipment.  Awareness during the Daylight Savings Time
change is the easiest way to avert any unforeseen problems.  Remember,
even if you don't live in a location which observes Daylight Savings
Time, there is still a time correction which occurs to resolve Delta T
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%CE%94T).  Finally, you may have newly
installed equipment incorrectly configured during installation and
erroneously activates the hourly time change when Daylight Savings Time
occurs.

   All times within the database are stored using the UTC
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_Universal_Time) time standard
and converted to the user's time zone (based on their location) for
display purposes.  All HVAC devices have time specified in the device's
time zone (based on its location).  The time you choose on an HVAC
device setting is relative to the device's time zone.

   Use the Time Administration setting to update all active thermostat
devices to make sure all thermostat devices are set with the correct
time for their time zone and Daylight Savings Time setting.  A time
update must be applied to all thermostat devices whenever the Daylight
Savings Time change for the device's location.

   *Reference Information*

   * Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP)
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SNTP)
   * Network Time Protocol (NTP)
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Time_Protocol)
   * NTP Server Misuse and Abuse
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NTP_server_misuse_and_abuse)
   * NIST Authenticated NTP Service
     (http://www.nist.gov/pml/div688/grp40/auth-ntp.cfm)

7.3 Menu Structure
==================

The menu contains web pages by access permissions.  The menu is
segmented by *Main Menu*, *Language Admin Menu*, and *Admin Menu*.  The
menu segmentation represents a GNU remotecontrol administrative account
able to access all web pages and a non-administrative account only able
to access the web pages listed under *Main Menu*.

7.3.1 Main Menu
---------------

   * Home Page
   * Historical Reporting
   * User Settings

7.3.2 Language Admin Menu
-------------------------

   * Language Administration Dashboard
   * Browse Languages
   * Add a Language
   * Browse Messages
   * Browse Message Context
   * Help

7.3.3 Admin Menu
----------------

   * Administration Dashboard
   * Location Administration
   * Group Administration
   * User Administration
   * Exception List
   * New Thermostat
   * Undelete Thermostat
   * Time Administration
   * System Configuration

7.3.4 User Types
----------------

There are three types of users: *General*, *Translator*, and
*Administrator*.  All users are *General* users.  The *Translator* and
*Administrator* users are nominated in the *User Administration*
section.  Access to each web page is limited by user type.

   *Administrator*

   * admin-config.php
   * admin-exception-list.php
   * admin-exception.php
   * admin-group.php
   * admin-home.php
   * admin-location.php
   * admin-thermostat.php
   * admin-time.php
   * admin-undelete.php
   * admin-user.php
   * intl-context-list.php
   * intl-invalid-list.php
   * intl-language-add.php
   * intl-language-edit.php
   * intl-language-list.php
   * intl-message-list.php
   * intl-missing-list.php
   * intl-translation-add.php

   *General*

   * history.php
   * home.php
   * intl-help.php
   * intl-home.php
   * intl-translation-list.php
   * user-settings.php

   *Translator*

   * intl-message-list.php
   * intl-translation-add.php

   The web pages containing a table can either list or hide each column,
adjust the display order of each column, and sort each column.  These
settings are listed in the web page URL. This ability provides for your
browser bookmark to record these user preferences.

7.4 home.php
============

7.4.1 Purpose
-------------

The name of this web page is *Home Page*.  It is generated by the
*home.php* file.  This web page provides bulk management of thermostat
devices in the GNU remotecontrol application.

7.4.2 Fields
------------

   * *Check Box* - This field is a web form control to select the
     thermostat device for writing to the thermostat device with GNU
     remotecontrol.
   * *ID* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol thermostat device
     identifier defined in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *New
     Thermostat* web page, generated by the *admin-thermostat.php* file.
   * *Device Name* - This field is the Device Name, on the General
     Settings web page, of the thermostat device.
   * *Site Name* - This field is the Site Name, on the General Settings
     web page, of the thermostat device.
   * *Model #* - This field is the Model # of the thermostat device,
     resident as read-only in the thermostat device firmware.
   * *Location* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location defined
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.
   * *Group* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol group name defined in
     the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Group Administration* web
     page, generated by the *admin-group.php* file.
   * *Custom Name* - This field is unique to GNU remotecontrol and not
     on the thermostat device.  We added this field to supplement the
     *Device Name* and *Site Name* fields on the thermostat device.  The
     intent of this field is to increase capability when you use your
     Database Management to separate out thermostat devices for
     management purposes currently unforeseen.  It is always nice to
     have more capability than necessary.  An example of how to use this
     field is to enter GPS (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gps)
     coordinates of where your thermostat device is located or further
     define the *Site Name* field.
   * *Description* - This field is unique to GNU remotecontrol and not
     on the thermostat device.  We added this field to supplement the
     *Device Name* and *Site Name* fields on the thermostat device.  The
     intent of this field is to increase capability when you use your
     Database Management to separate out thermostat devices for
     management purposes currently unforeseen.  It is always nice to
     have more capability than necessary.  An example of how to use this
     field is to enter GPS (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gps)
     coordinates of where your thermostat device is located or further
     define the *Site Name* field.
   * *Address* - This field is the network address of your thermostat
     device.
   * *Username* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol user account
     defined in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *User
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.
   * *Action* - Apply the changes you prescribe to this record in the
     GNU remotecontrol database to either *Load* the existing thermostat
     device settings stored on the thermostat device into *home.php*,
     *Edit* an existing record, *Delete* an existing record, or *Admin*
     to load the thermostat device web server pages into your browser.

7.4.3 All Available Fields
--------------------------

   * Check Box
   * ID
   * Device Name
   * Site Name
   * Model #
   * Location ID
   * Location
   * Group ID
   * Group
   * Custom Name
   * Description
   * Address
   * Port
   * Auth User
   * Username
   * Action

7.4.4 Usage
-----------

This web page displays all of your active thermostat devices.  View your
inactive thermostat devices on the *Undelete Thermostats* web page,
generated by the *admin-undelete.php* file.  Activate an inactive
thermostat device to display the thermostat device in *home.php*.

   Any user account visiting *home.php* without first establishing
locations is redirected to *admin-location.php*.  Any user account
visiting *home.php* without first establishing groups is redirected to
*admin-group.php*.  Establishing both groups and locations is a task of
the GNU remotecontrol administrator user account.  The first user
account to login to GNU remotecontrol is set to *Is Admin* status.  This
status selection is regulated by visiting the *admin-user.php* file.

   This web page provides for viewing existing thermostat device
settings stored in the thermostat device and writing new settings to the
thermostat devices.  Loading *home.php* causes each attribute of each
thermostat device to be read.  You only view the settings of a single
thermostat device, one at a time.  The data from a thermostat device is
not loaded if the thermostat device cannot be reached or if the
thermostat device is unresponsive.  Click the *Load* option in the
*Action* field to view the settings of a single thermostat device.  This
action will read the said thermostat device and load the thermostat
device settings into this web page.  Then, alter the thermostat settings
as you prefer.  Then, click the check box on the row of the thermostat
device you want to apply these settings.  You can apply settings to one,
multiple, or all active thermostat devices.

   Selecting a collection of thermostat devices is easily accomplished
by selecting them with their *Group* field entry.  Click the hyperlink
in the *Group* field to activate the check box field of the thermostat
device record in the GNU remotecontrol database.

   Click the *Submit* button.  GNU remotecontrol goes to each device,
makes the changes you prescribe, and populates *Historical Reporting*
and *Exception List* in the GNU remotecontrol database, as appropriate.
A successful write event to the thermostat devices renders the message
*Settings applied successfully* in the color of green.  An unsuccessful
write event to the thermostat device renders the message *Error* in the
color of red.  The exact message from each thermostat device for each
failed write event is captured.  This capability enables you to then use
*history.php* or *admin-exception-list.php* or Database Management for
thermostat device diagnostics to identify if any thermostat device is
changing settings, identifying if you need to investigate who is doing
this changing, or if the device is problematic.

   There are *five* different fields available to easily manage your
thermostat devices.  You have *two* on the thermostat device; *Device
Name* and *Site Name*.  You have *three* in the GNU remotecontrol
database; *Group*, *Custom Name*, and *Description*.  You also have
*Model #*, *Address*, and *Username* available in the GNU remotecontrol
database, though they may not be considered an easy way to identify your
thermostat devices.  Plan out how you want to populate these fields,
making your life much easier for managing your thermostat devices on a
daily basis.

   You need to know the settings on the different IP enabled thermostat
devices you are charged with managing.  Using GNU remotecontrol will
help you see if anyone or anything has changed the settings on a
thermostat device, thereby altering or defeating your Energy Management
strategy.  Combining into the equation a Remote Monitoring Server with
Email Server notification and you are on top of the game for Energy
Management.

   Reload *home.php* at any time you prefer to poll each thermostat
device and read the current parameters of the attributes for all
thermostat devices.

   All user types can access this web page.

7.4.4.1 Object Parameters
.........................

The list of objects and parameters available on the thermostat device is
listed below.

   *-HVAC Settings-*

   *HVAC Mode:*
   * Off
   * Heat
   * Cool
   * Auto

   *Fan Mode:*
   * Auto
   * On
   * Schedule

   *Setback Status:*
   * Normal
   * Hold
   * Override

   *Setback Heat:*
   * Degree Setting

   *Setback Cool:*

   * Degree Setting

   *-Setback Scheduling-*

   *Period*
   * Morning
   * Day
   * Evening
   * Night

   *Time*
   * Hour
   * Minute

   *Day Class Schedules*
   * Occupied
   * Unoccupied
   * Other

   *Heat*
   * Degree Setting

   *Cool*
   * Degree Setting

   *Fan*
   * Off
   * On
   * 15, 30, 45 minutes

   *Default Weekly Schedule - Days*
   * Sunday
   * Monday
   * Tuesday
   * Wednesday
   * Thursday
   * Friday
   * Saturday

   *Default Weekly Schedule - Setback Scheduling*
   * Occupied
   * Unoccupied
   * Other

   *-Sensor Settings-*

   *Local Sensor - State*
   * Disabled
   * Enabled

   *Local Sensor - Averaging*
   * Disabled
   * Enabled

   *Local Sensor - Correction*
   * Degree Setting Correction

   *Remote Sensor 1 - State*
   * Disabled
   * Enabled

   *Remote Sensor 1 - Averaging*
   * Disabled
   * Enabled

   *Remote Sensor 1 - Correction*
   * Degree Setting Correction

   *Remote Sensor 2 - State*
   * Disabled
   * Enabled

   *Remote Sensor 2 - Averaging*
   * Disabled
   * Enabled

   *Remote Sensor 2 - Correction*
   * Degree Setting Correction

7.5 history.php
===============

7.5.1 Purpose
-------------

The name of this web page is *Historical Reporting*.  It is generated by
the *history.php* file.  This web page provides access to a read-only
view of successful write transactions to your thermostat devices.

7.5.2 Fields
------------

   * *Timestamp* - This field is the time recorded from the GNU
     remotecontrol server of when the change occurred.
   * *Thermostat* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol thermostat
     defined in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *New
     Thermostat* web page, generated by the *admin-thermostat.php* file.
   * *Location* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location defined
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.
   * *Username* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol user account
     defined in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *User
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.
   * *Group* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol group name defined in
     the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Group Administration* web
     page, generated by the *admin-group.php* file.
   * *Field* - This field is the device attribute changed.
   * *Previous Value* - This field is the previous value of the device
     attribute changed.
   * *Current Value* - This field is the present value of the device
     attribute changed.

7.5.3 All Available Fields
--------------------------

   * ID
   * Timestamp
   * Thermostat ID
   * Thermostat
   * Description
   * Location
   * Username
   * Group
   * Field
   * Previous Value
   * Current Value

7.5.4 Usage
-----------

This web page separates the list successful write transactions to your
thermostat devices from the unsuccessful write transactions.  The
unsuccessful write transactions are listed on the *Exception List* web
page, generated by the *admin-exception-list.php* file.

   This web page provides easy review of changes to the settings on your
thermostat devices.  Use the filter fields at the top of the table to
quickly find similar fields in multiple rows.  This search functionality
helps to identify patterns in your change activities.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.6 user-settings.php
=====================

7.6.1 Purpose
-------------

The name of this web page is *User Settings*.  It is generated by the
*user-settings.php* file.  This web page provides access to individual
configuration of the settings available for the GNU remotecontrol user
account in use.

7.6.2 Fields
------------

   * *Username* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol user account
     defined in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *User
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.
   * *User ID* - This field is the unique identifier of a user account
     within the GNU remotecontrol database.
   * *Used Thermostats* - This field is the total number of thermostat
     devices the user account can activate, from the *Thermostat Limit*
     field on the *admin-user.php* file, along with how many thermostat
     devices have been activated by the user account.
   * *Location* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location defined
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.
   * *Language* - This field is for future functionality.  Subsequent
     GNU remotecontrol releases will have additional display languages
     available for the user interface.  The only language available now
     is English.

7.6.3 Usage
-----------

This web page provides editing ability for user preferences of the user
account.  The user *Location* is used to provide dates and times in the
correct time zone with Daylight Savings Time adjustments.  A user type
of administrator has user *Location* as the *default* location for new
thermostats.  The *Language* setting nominates the user's preferred user
interface localization.

   Click the *Submit* to apply your changes.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.7 intl-home.php
=================

7.7.1 Purpose
-------------

The name of this web page is *Language Administration Dashboard*.  It is
generated by the *intl-home.php* file.  This web page provides a review
of your Language Administration in your GNU remotecontrol

7.7.2 Usage
-----------

Instruction for using this web page is listed on the *Language
Administration Help* web page, generated by the *intl-help.php* file.
This web page provides detailed instruction on using the GNU
remotecontrol Language Administration System.

7.8 intl-language-list.php
==========================

7.8.1 Purpose
-------------

The name of this web page is *Language List*.  It is generated by the
*intl-language-list.php* file.  This web page provides the detailed list
of languages you have established within your GNU remotecontrol.

7.8.2 All Available Fields
--------------------------

   * Langtag
   * Fallback
   * Language
   * English Name
   * Local Name
   * Active
   * Operations

7.8.3 Usage
-----------

Instruction for using this web page is listed on the *Language
Administration Help* web page, generated by the *intl-help.php* file.
This web page provides detailed instruction on using the GNU
remotecontrol Language Administration System.

7.9 intl-language-add.php
=========================

7.9.1 Purpose
-------------

The name of this web page is *Add Language*.  It is generated by the
*intl-language-add.php* file.  This web page provides the ability to add
a new language to your GNU remotecontrol.

7.9.2 Usage
-----------

Instruction for using this web page is listed on the *Language
Administration Help* web page, generated by the *intl-help.php* file.
This web page provides detailed instruction on using the GNU
remotecontrol Language Administration System.

7.10 intl-message-list.php
==========================

7.10.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Message List*.  It is generated by the
*intl-message-list.php* file.  This web page provides the ability to
review messages.  Messages are English language content available for
translation.  Each message in the system can be associated with one or
more contexts and one or more content types.

7.10.2 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * Content
   * Types
   * Context Codes
   * Contexts
   * Hash
   * Sequence
   * Words
   * Translations
   * Index

7.10.3 Usage
------------

Instruction for using this web page is listed on the *Language
Administration Help* web page, generated by the *intl-help.php* file.
This web page provides detailed instruction on using the GNU
remotecontrol Language Administration System.

7.11 intl-context-list.php
==========================

7.11.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Message Context List*.  It is generated by
the *intl-context-list.php* file.  This web page provides to review
message context.  Message contexts are a label that indicates the
context of a message.  The message context exists to provide support for
message content which may vary according to context.

7.11.2 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * Code
   * Context
   * Message Count
   * Type
   * Words

7.11.3 Usage
------------

Instruction for using this web page is listed on the *Language
Administration Help* web page, generated by the *intl-help.php* file.
This web page provides detailed instruction on using the GNU
remotecontrol Language Administration System.

7.12 intl-help.php
==================

7.12.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Language Administration Help*.  It is
generated by the *intl-help.php* file.  This web page provides detailed
instruction on using the GNU remotecontrol Language Administration
System.

7.12.2 Usage
------------

This is a read-only web page providing all help available on the GNU
remotecontrol Language Administration System.

7.13 admin-home.php
===================

7.13.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Administration Dashboard*.  It is
generated by the *admin-home.php* file.  This web page provides a
listing of all web pages in the GNU remotecontrol application having
administrative privileges.

7.13.2 Fields
-------------

This web page has no fields.

7.13.3 Usage
------------

Click on the *hyperlink* of the web page you wish to view.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.14 admin-location.php
=======================

7.14.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Location Administration*.  It is generated
by the *admin-location.php* file.  This web page provides access to
configure your GNU remotecontrol thermostat locations.

7.14.2 Fields
-------------

   * *Location Name* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location you
     define in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.
   * *Time Zone* - Search for the continent, country, state, or city for
     an appropriate time zone accounting for with Daylight Savings Time
     adjustments for this location.
   * *UTC Offset* - This field value is determined from the entry listed
     in the corresponding Time Zone field by calculating the UTC offset
     with respect to the current date accounting for Daylight Savings
     Time calculations.
   * *Action* - Apply the changes you prescribe to this record in the
     GNU remotecontrol database to either *Add* a record, *Edit* an
     existing record, or *Delete* an existing record.

7.14.3 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * Location ID
   * Location Name
   * Time Zone
   * UTC Offset
   * Action

7.14.4 Usage
------------

This web page provides the ability to find a geographic location and
correctly identify the time zone of the location.  Each thermostat
device is resident in a single location.  This functionality is used
when reading time events in GNU remotecontrol and writing the date and
time to the thermostat device.  Additionally, use this web page to
identify your location to configure your GNU remotecontrol installation.
This configuration can be viewed on the *System Configuration* web page,
generated by the *admin-config.php* file.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.15 admin-group.php
====================

7.15.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Group Administration*.  It is generated by
the *admin-group.php* file.  This web page provides access to configure
your GNU remotecontrol groups.

7.15.2 Fields
-------------

   * *Group Name* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol group name you
     define in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Group
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-group.php* file.
   * *Description* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol group
     description you define for this record in the GNU remotecontrol
     database.
   * *Action* - Apply the changes you prescribe to this record in the
     GNU remotecontrol database to either *Add* a record, *Edit* an
     existing record, or *Delete* an existing record.

7.15.3 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * Group ID
   * Group Name
   * Description
   * Action

7.15.4 Usage
------------

This web page provides the ability to define groups within GNU
remotecontrol.  Each thermostat device is a member of a single group.
This functionality is used to ease management of writing to multiple
thermostat devices at one time.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.16 admin-user.php
===================

7.16.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *User Administration*.  It is generated by
the *admin-user.php* file.  This web page provides access to configure
your GNU remotecontrol user accounts.

7.16.2 Fields
-------------

   * *Username* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol user account you
     define in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *User
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.
   * *Is Admin?*  - This field determines if a user account can access
     the administrative web pages in GNU remotecontrol.  GNU
     remotecontrol administrative web pages are php files containing the
     construct *admin-* in the file name.
   * *Is Translator?*  - This field is for future functionality.
     Subsequent GNU remotecontrol releases will have additional display
     languages available for the user interface.  The only language
     available now is English.
   * *Location* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location defined
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.
   * *Thermostat Limit* - This field determines the maximum number of
     thermostat devices you allow for the GNU remotecontrol user
     account.
   * *Language* - This field is for future functionality.  Subsequent
     GNU remotecontrol releases will have additional display languages
     available for the user interface.  The only language available now
     is English.
   * *Action* - Apply the changes you prescribe to this record in the
     GNU remotecontrol database to either *Add* a record, *Edit* an
     existing record, or *Delete* an existing record.

7.16.3 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * User ID
   * Username
   * Is Admin?
   * Is Translator?
   * Location
   * Thermostat Limit
   * Language
   * Action

7.16.4 Usage
------------

This web page provides the ability to define users within GNU
remotecontrol.  The first user account to login is set to admin status
via the *Is Admin?*  field.  All other GNU remotecontrol user accounts
must be established through this web page in combination with a Web
Server user account.  Add GNU remotecontrol user accounts with the
*exact same name* you setup the user accounts in your Web Server.

   The *Is Translator?*  field is present for future functionality.  The
ability to alter the display language and wording of GNU remotecontrol
will arrive through a future GNU remotecontrol version release.

   We added a means of user control to this web page, per a request
received during our design of GNU remotecontrol.  The demand for this
feature is the desire to increase awareness of the need to also setup
Remote Monitoring for a newly added thermostat device.  The intent of
this feature is to provide a check and balance for all roles using GNU
remotecontrol.  Imagine adding a thermostat device to your facility and
forgetting to setup monitoring of the thermostat device, only to find
out after a month or so has passed you have no information collected for
this newly added thermostat device.  This feature helps to remind you to
setup monitoring of the thermostat device when you add more thermostat
devices to your facility.  You set the total number of thermostat
devices each user account is allowed to whatever you prefer.  This
collectively provides for a separation of duties between the GNU
remotecontrol administrator and the GNU remotecontrol user.  This
separation of duties greatly helps to structure change management in
your environment between the different people in your organization.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *Is Admin?*
field.

7.17 admin-exception-list.php
=============================

7.17.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Exception List*.  It is generated by the
*admin-exception-list.php* file.  This web page provides a read-only
view of unsuccessful write transactions to your thermostat devices.

7.17.2 Fields
-------------

   * *ID* - This field is the unique identifier of the error report
     entry in the GNU remotecontrol exception list.
   * *Timestamp* - This field is the date and time the error occurred
     within GNU remotecontrol.
   * *User* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol user account involved
     with the error.
   * *Type* - This field is the type of error generated by GNU
     remotecontrol.
   * *Message* - This field is the message from the error generated by
     GNU remotecontrol.
   * *Code* - This field is the error code from the error generated by
     GNU remotecontrol.
   * *File* - This field is the file involved with the error generated
     by GNU remotecontrol.
   * *Line* - This field is the line of the file involved with the error
     generated by GNU remotecontrol.

7.17.3 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * ID
   * Timestamp
   * User
   * Type
   * Previous
   * Message
   * Code
   * File
   * Line
   * Message Stack
   * Trace

7.17.4 Usage
------------

This web page displays all unsuccessful write activity within GNU
remotecontrol.  The *Timestamp* field has hyperlink functionality,
leading to the *Exception Details* web page generated by the
*admin-exception.php* file.  There are two additional fields here not
found in the *Exception List* table, *Previous* and *Trace*.  Previous
has any related error messages and Trace has the lineage of the error
event.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.18 admin-thermostat.php
=========================

7.18.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *New Thermostat*.  It is generated by the
*admin-thermostat.php* file.  This web page provides the ability to
enter your thermostat device information in the GNU remotecontrol
application.

7.18.2 Fields
-------------

*Connection Options*
   * *Thermostat ID* - This field is always set to *New*, as you are
     adding a new thermostat.
   * *Address* - This field is the network address of your thermostat
     device.  The connection is via http, so you do not need to enter
     http:// into this field.  You can enter either a fully qualified
     domain name address or IP address, depending upon how you have
     setup network access between your GNU remotecontrol to the
     thermostat device.
   * *Port* - This field is the port of the network address of your
     thermostat device.
   * *Username* - This field is always set to the *admin* user account
     of the thermostat device.
   * *Password* - This field is the password for the *admin* user
     account of the thermostat device.

   *Database Settings* - This information is resident within the GNU
remotecontrol database.
   * *User* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol user account you
     define in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *User
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.
     The *edit* hyperlink leads to the *User Administration* web page,
     generated by the *admin-user.php* file.
   * *Custom Name* - This field is unique to GNU remotecontrol and not
     on the thermostat device.  We added this field to supplement the
     *Device Name* and *Site Name* fields on the thermostat device.  The
     intent of this field is to increase capability when you use your
     Database Management to separate out thermostat devices for
     management purposes currently unforeseen.  It is always nice to
     have more capability than necessary.  An example of how to use this
     field is to enter GPS (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gps)
     coordinates of where your thermostat device is located or further
     define the *Site Name* field.
   * *Description* - This field is unique to GNU remotecontrol and not
     on the thermostat device.  We added this field to supplement the
     *Device Name* and *Site Name* fields on the thermostat device.  The
     intent of this field is to increase capability when you use your
     Database Management to separate out thermostat devices for
     management purposes currently unforeseen.  It is always nice to
     have more capability than necessary.  An example of how to use this
     field is to enter GPS (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gps)
     coordinates of where your thermostat device is located or further
     define the *Site Name* field.
   * *Location* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location defined
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.  The *edit* hyperlink leads to the *Location Administration*
     web page, generated by the *admin-location.php* file.
   * *Group* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol group name defined in
     the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Group Administration* web
     page, generated by the *admin-group.php* file.  The *edit*
     hyperlink leads to the *Group Administration* web page, generated
     by the *admin-group.php* file.

   *Device Settings* - This information is resident within the
thermostat device internal memory.
   * *Device Name* - This field is the Device Name, on the General
     Settings web page, of the thermostat device.
   * *Site Name* - This field is the Site Name, on the General Settings
     web page, of the thermostat device.
   * *Model #* - This field is the Model # of the thermostat device,
     resident as read-only in the thermostat device firmware.
   * *Time* - This field is the thermostat device date and time, on the
     General Settings web page, of the thermostat device.

   *Sensor Settings*
   * *Scale* - This field is the Temperature Scale setting, on the
     General Settings web page, of the thermostat device.
   * *Local Sensor* - This field is the Local Sensor configuration
     setting, on the Sensor Settings web page, of the thermostat device.
     This feature is device specific, per manufacturer model design.
   * *Remote Sensor 1* - This field is the Remote Sensor 1 configuration
     setting, on the Sensor Settings web page, of the thermostat device.
     This feature is device specific, per manufacturer model design.
   * *Remote Sensor 2* - This field is the Remote Sensor 2 configuration
     setting, on the Sensor Settings web page, of the thermostat device.
     This feature is device specific, per manufacturer model design.

   *Form Submission*
   * *Next* - Select the option of *Add New Thermostat*, *Edit
     Thermostat*, or *Go to Homepage*.
   * *Submit* - Click the *Submit* button to apply your action choice to
     the GNU remotecontrol database.

7.18.3 Usage
------------

This web page provides the ability to define thermostat devices within
GNU remotecontrol.  This is the only place to configure your sensor
settings.  The sensor settings are unique to each thermostat device.

   Enter the *Connection Options* field values, then tab out of the
*Password* field.  The thermostat device is read.  The Device Settings
and Sensor Settings are populated in the web page.  Select *Add New
Thermostat* to add this record to the GNU remotecontrol database.
Select *Edit Thermostat* to add the record and validate the entries are
as preferred.  Select *Go to Homepage* to view the thermostat device
listed in *home.php*.

   You must have the password to the *admin* user account for each
thermostat device for GNU remotecontrol to either read from or write to
the thermostat device.  This approach is to know with certainty the GNU
remotecontrol user has administrative authority to the thermostat
device.  You having complete authority of a thermostat device in your
facility is a critical step in you achieving success with your Energy
Management strategy.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.19 admin-undelete.php
=======================

7.19.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Undelete Thermostats*.  It is generated by
the *admin-undelete.php* file.  This web page provides access to restore
display of thermostat devices deleted from the GNU remotecontrol
application.  Undeleted thermostat devices are displayed on the *Home
Page* web page, generated by the *home.php file*.  This functionality
provides for maintaining historical records even though a thermostat
device may be listed as deleted in GNU remotecontrol.

7.19.2 Fields
-------------

   * *ID* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol thermostat device
     identification number in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the
     *Edit Thermostat* web page, generated by the *admin-thermostat.php
     file*.  This field value is automatically assigned.
   * *Location* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol location defined
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Location
     Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-location.php*
     file.
   * *Group* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol group name you define
     in the GNU remotecontrol database, from the *Group Administration*
     web page, generated by the *admin-group.php* file.
   * *Custom Name* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol thermostat
     device custom name you define in the GNU remotecontrol database,
     from the *Edit Thermostat* web page, generated by the
     *admin-thermostat.php* file.
   * *Description* - This field is the GNU remotecontrol thermostat
     device description you define in the GNU remotecontrol database,
     from the *Edit Thermostat* web page, generated by the
     *admin-thermostat.php* file.
   * *Action* - This field provides the ability to restore a thermostat.
     A restored thermostat is removed from the table of deleted
     thermostats and is available on the *Home Page*.

7.19.3 All Available Fields
---------------------------

   * ID
   * Location ID
   * Location
   * Group ID
   * Group
   * Custom Name
   * Description
   * Address
   * Port
   * Auth User
   * Action

7.19.4 Usage
------------

Click *Restore* in the *Action* column to restore a deleted thermostat.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.20 admin-time.php
===================

7.20.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *Time Administration*.  It is generated by
the *admin-time.php* file.  This web page provides to set the time on
all active thermostat devices for the GNU remotecontrol user account.

7.20.2 Usage
------------

Click the button *Update Time*.  Each active thermostat device is
updated with GNU remotecontrol time for thermostat device timezones and
Daylight Savings Time based on the location of each device.  Your GNU
remotecontrol time is the time setting of the computer hosting GNU
remotecontrol.  A *success* message is rendered in *green* and a
*failure* message is rendered in *red*.  Review the *Historical
Reporting* and *Exception List* web pages to learn *success* or
*failure* outcomes to the time setting action.  Please review the
section above called *Time* for more information as to why this
functionality has been designed.

7.21 admin-config.php
=====================

7.21.1 Purpose
--------------

The name of this web page is *System Configuration*.  It is generated by
the *admin-config.php* file.  This web page provides display of the
system configuration settings.  They are configured by editing the
*config.php* file in the web root of the GNU remotecontrol application.

7.21.2 Fields
-------------

*Debug Settings*
   * *DEBUG* - Whether debugging is supported or not.

   *Database Settings*
   * *DB_HOST* - IP address or fully qualified domain name of MySQL
     server.
   * *DB_USER* - Username of MySQL server user.
   * *DB_PASS* - Password of MySQL server user.
   * *DB_NAME* - Name of MySQL database.
   * *DB_TZ_NAME* - MySQL named time zone support.

   *Web Settings*
   * *WEB_ROOT* - URL prefix.

   *HTML Settings*
   * *HTML_VERSION* - 4: HTML 4; X: XHTML; 5: HTML 5.
   * *HTML_PRETTY* - true: pretty print HTML; false: compress HTML

   *Temperature Settings*
   * *DEFAULT_SCALE* - 1: Fahrenheit, 2: Celsius

   *Date/Time Settings*
   * *DEFAULT_TIMEZONE* - This is the timezone where your GNU
     remotecontrol resides.  Your GNU remotecontrol uses your system
     date and time to begin all GNU remotecontrol time based activities.

   *Network Settings*
   * *WRITE_ATTEMPTS* - Number of times to retry device writes.
   * *READ_ATTEMPTS* - Number of times to retry device reads.
   * *NET_TIMEOUT* - Number of seconds to wait for device operation to
     succeed.
   * *RECOVER_FROM_FACTORY_RESET* - Whether to auto-recover from factory
     reset or not.  This is a PHP function to apply the thermostat
     device password stored in the GNU remotecontrol database to the
     said thermostat device.  *THIS IS A DEVIATION TO THE PROLIPHIX
     API*.

7.21.3 Usage
------------

This web page provides the ability to review the settings of your GNU
remotecontrol configuration.  This ability helps to resolve any
performance problems caused by configuration or if you need to change a
setting such as *DEBUG*, *HTML_PRETTY*, or any of the *Network
Settings*.

   Security to access this web page is handled by the *User
Administration* web page, generated by the *admin-user.php* file.

7.22 Troubleshooting
====================

   * Review the *Exception List* web page to read the information
     transmitted by the thermostat device to learn why the thermostat
     device failed to properly respond.
   * Review the error log files for your Web Server, Database Server, or
     PHP any time you find a problem where you are not receiving an
     error directly from GNU remotecontrol.  Remember, each error log
     has various logging levels.

8 Usage Recommendations
***********************

8.1 Start Small
===============

GNU remotecontrol can operate on a laptop, a desktop, even a hand-held
computer.....if you can achieve setting up your Web Server and Database
Server.

   It will probably be much easier on you to setup a GNU remotecontrol
system while using your existing Energy Management Control System.  This
will allow you to learn, test, try, think, try some more, all
side-by-side with all of your existing systems.  Then, when you are
ready, switch over seamlessly to use GNU remotecontrol as your primary
system, along with your (then) old Energy Management Control System, to
make sure you are absolutely comfortable with your setup of your GNU
remotecontrol system.  Finally, once your are comfortable with your GNU
remotecontrol, decommission your old Energy Management Control System.

   Benefits of running GNU remotecontrol on a smaller hardware
combination include:
   * Getting GNU remotecontrol up and running for a Proof-of-Concept.
   * Managing the HVAC systems of different sites without having to be
     at each of those sites.

8.2 Strongly Encouraged
=======================

   * Restrict your data network to only allow a few network addresses to
     connect to the IP enabled thermostat devices.  This makes sure the
     IP enabled thermostat devices does not get overloaded from too many
     users trying to access it where it fails to respond, possibly
     requiring the IP enabled thermostat devices to be power cycled.
     Instead, use the logged data of by minute and by quarter hour to
     run your monitoring and reporting.
   * Setup your Remote Monitoring Server to log sensor readings every
     minute.  Do this for fifteen concurrent minutes.  Delete previous
     records so you only have the fifteen readings in this record set at
     any given time.  Then, you have a granular recording of data in
     combination with your Remote Monitoring Server recording the same
     information in fifteen-minute intervals.  It takes about a minute
     for a change to register on a sensor, shy of an extreme combination
     of circumstances.  This sensor reading approach provides you with
     all of the monitoring and reporting data you could ever hope for.
   * Script setting the time on your IP enabled thermostat devices.
     Recommend setting the time every month, at a minimum.  Clocks of
     all kinds are always gaining or losing a few seconds here and
     there, to the point things add up to a few minutes here and there.
     Setting the time on a regular monthly basis avoids the whole
     gaining and losing problem.
   * Roaming Brown Outs
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brownout_%28electricity%29) and
     Natural Disasters in the vicinity of your thermostat devices cause
     for your thermostat devices to have all kinds of power supply
     problems.  Your thermostat device may well have a weak on-board
     battery.  That means the time on your thermostat has a poor chance
     of being correct and any Setback Scheduling on the device has
     little to no chance of being properly executed.  Set the time every
     hour on your thermostat device, at the minimum.  The fact a Natural
     Disaster has occurred means your Energy Management strategy will be
     unable to occur, anyway.  Plan some type of HVAC Settings for
     dealing with a Natural Disaster.  Perhaps a plan for the Winter
     months and a plan for the Summer months.  Perhaps turning on the
     fan for Architecture Ventilation
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ventilation_%28architecture%29) is
     the best course of action, promoting health and safety in the
     facility.  Perhaps activating heating or cooling is also in the
     best course of action.  Use scripting to help you meet this need.
   * Use Database Management to change the time in the thermostat
     profile when Daylight Savings Time occurs.  For example, Database
     Management will convert North America Eastern Standard Time, with a
     UTC offset of -5, to North America Eastern Daylight Time, with a
     UTC offset of -4.  Remember, there is Australian Eastern Time and
     North American Eastern Time, each with Daylight and Standard
     options.  Clearly, the database aspect of GNU remotecontrol will
     help you keep all of your time settings correct.  Set it up as a
     SQL script to change the Time Zone entry in the thermostat profile.
     Run the script when Daylight Savings Time occurs.
   * Script setting your heating-cooling-ventilation levels as a
     comparison of outdoors conditions.  Say so many degrees difference
     between outside and inside, same for a difference in percentage of
     relative humidity.
   * Use the Remote Monitoring of your location to change a website
     appearance
     (http://css-tricks.com/using-weather-data-to-change-your-websites-apperance-through-php-and-css/).
   * Use the Remote Monitoring of your location to build Software
     Widgets (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_widget) or Web
     Widgets (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_widget).
   * Setup a simple web page which will fit the temperature and humidity
     readings of both the thermostat devices and the weather conditions
     you care about onto the screen of your cell phone
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microbrowser).  You then can easily
     see, in a single viewing (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_Web),
     what you care to know.

8.3 Food for Thought
====================

There are many different ways you can use the data you collect:
   * Really Simple Syndication (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rss) (RSS)
   * JavaScript Object Notation (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)
     (JSON)
   * Extensible Markup Language (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML) (XML)
   * Atom (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom_%28standard%29)
   * Web Service (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_service)
   * Software Widget (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_widget)
   * Web Widget (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_widget)

9 Use Case Scenarios
********************

The following are real examples, with abstract names, to illustrate how
to put all of this technology together so it will work for you.

9.1 Scenario 1 - Building Maintenance
=====================================

This person is overworked and underpaid at the *ABC Corporation*.  They
have a boss that all the time wants to know if "thus and so" got done.
This person needs a way to get things done faster and have automated
documentation that it is complete.

   This person uses GNU remotecontrol to help with setting the HVAC in
this company, and does a screen shot of the transaction history for
their boss to see, as their boss wants an email to see what happens.

9.2 Scenario 2 - Office Worker
==============================

This person is overworked and underpaid at *Super-Duper Insurance
Company*.  They haves a boss that all the time wants to know if "thus
and so" got done.  They need a way to get things done faster and have
automated documentation that it is complete.

   They use GNU remotecontrol to help with setting the HVAC in this
company, and does a screen shot of the transaction history for their
boss to see, as their boss wants an email to see what happens.

9.3 Scenario 3 - Property Manager
=================================

This person is overworked and underpaid at *Manage 4 You Property
Management Corporation*.  They have a boss that all the time wants to
know if "thus and so" got done.  This person needs a way to get things
done faster and have automated documentation that it is complete.

   This person uses GNU remotecontrol to help with setting the HVAC in
the properties to achieve considerable savings on energy cost, and does
a screen shot of the transaction history for their boss to see, as their
boss wants an email to see what happens.

9.4 Scenario 4 - Restaurant Operations
======================================

This person is doing pretty well in life.  This person owns several
restaurants around town called *Super Good Eats*.  Each site has two
different HVAC units.  This person also setup a thermostat in their
house.  Later, they needed to care for their elderly mother, so they put
a thermostat in the house of their mother.  When this person sets the
thermostat in their house, they set the house of their mother the same
way.  This way, this person knows pretty well how things are in the
house of their mother, even though they are not there with their mother.

   The corporate office is all of the time messing with the thermostat
and there is a lot of inner-office politics from this problem.  This
person wanted that problem to go away, and to quit paying through the
nose in electric bill to keep the air conditioning going.  This person
set's the corporate office the same as their home, so they know the
climate in the office pretty is much the same as the climate in their
home.  The owner can now can shut down arguments often before they
occur.

   This person is saving so much money on energy costs they were able to
buy a cabin in the mountains for when they and their family want to get
away from the ocean front, where they live.  This person remotely sets
the temperature before they arrive at their cabin.  The owner also makes
sure that the temperature and humidity in their cabin is not too extreme
when they are away, so pipes don't burst, and that there is not a mold
or mildew problem.

9.5 Scenario 5 - Certified Energy Manager
=========================================

The Certified Energy Manager (CEM) needs to manage multiple sites for
multiple customers.  The CEM needs to log data over a long time period.
The CEM needs to adjust set-points on different HVAC equipment to work
out the specific energy control measures for each customer.  The CEM has
multiple Direct Digital Control
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_Digital_Control) (DDC) points.  The
CEM needs to know a great deal of information from these DDC points.
The CEM could greatly benefit from having all of this information coming
to them in a structured manner, all stored in a database, leveraging
their already existing Information Technology to access and manage this
collection of resources.

   The CEM can setup GNU remotecontrol over different computers.  The
Web Server, Database Server, Email Server, and Remote Monitoring Server
are all separate from the CEM laptop.  The CEM is free to travel and
access GNU remotecontrol as necessary to adjust set-points, while
receiving notifications something needs attention.  The CEM is not bound
to their office all day long.

9.6 Scenario 6 - Industrial Manufacturing Facility
==================================================

This site has many different air-handling units, many different dampers,
and several sources of heat.  The facility has adequate staff to handle
on-site maintenance.  Please see the section above regarding the
*Certified Energy Manager* to learn more about the aspect of accessing
and managing Direct Digital Control (DDC) points.

   The benefit here is using GNU remotecontrol to decrease reaction time
when Remote Monitoring finds a temperature or humidity threshold is
close to being reached and not interrupt manufacturing operations.

9.7 Scenario 7 - Facility Manager
=================================

This scenario is a refinement of the Industrial Manufacturing Facility
illustration, but wider in scope than only manufacturing.

   The Facility Manager often does not have a Certified Energy Manager
to work with them.  Please see the section above regarding the
*Certified Energy Manager* to learn more about the aspect of accessing
and managing Direct Digital Control (DDC) points.

   This site has many different air-handling units, many different
dampers, and several sources of heat.  The facility has adequate staff
to handle on-site maintenance.  The benefit here is using GNU
remotecontrol to decrease reaction time when Remote Monitoring finds a
temperature or humidity threshold is close to being reached and not
interrupt facility operations.

   Examples of their daily maintenance routine includes:

   * Cleaning thermostat devices and sensors after they get a build up
     of dust, oil, or other pollutants on them, defeating their ability
     to operate well or at all.
   * Assist with device calibrating efforts, as a hand-held thermostat
     and a networked sensor showing the same reading is always
     preferred.
   * Justifying HVAC upgrades, as appropriate, to different areas of the
     facility.  Examples of this functionality include a fan, a
     compressor, a coil, or changing from constant air volume to a
     variable air volume terminal unit.
   * Managing workers to achieve these tasks.

   There are loads of reasons to implement automation in this facility.
Mostly, to help the staff accomplish their work in a timely manner, and
assure they have a way to schedule vacation time for the staff.

9.8 Scenario 8 - External Information
=====================================

See the *Cautionary* paragraph in the *Power over Ethernet* section.  It
is necessary to understand about powering a thermostat device for this
scenario to make sense.  There are countless ways to bring external
information sensors into your IP enabled thermostat device and use your
Remote Monitoring Server to get that data to you.

9.9 Scenario 9 - Financial Manager
==================================

The Financial Manager is the person who has spending authority over the
facility.  Month after month, they have high electric and fuel bills
because their facility is running either too hot or too cold due to an
inability to effectively operate the HVAC systems.  They do not have
separate meters to know what part of the facility is using however much
electricity or fuel.  They simply have to do something, as they cannot
justify these high expense every month.  They lead a Cost Benefit
Analysis (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost%E2%80%93benefit_analysis)
for their facility, leveraging the staff working at the facility, a
Certified Energy Manager, off-site staff, and anyone else they need to
complete their Cost Benefit Analysis.  The end result is to know if GNU
remotecontrol will help them lower their electric and fuel bills.  Most
likely, it will.

9.10 Scenario 10 - Automated Meter Reading
==========================================

Automated Meter Reading
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_meter_reading) is not the same
as Smart Metering (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_meter).  They are
both part of Advanced Metering Infrastructure
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_meter#Advanced_metering_infrastructure).
Smart Metering has much more capability than Automated Meter Reading.
Suffice it to say, if you are going to implement either of these
technologies, it only makes sense to be able to do something with all of
this data.  Responding by changing your HVAC system, as appropriate,
considerably helps to increase the effectiveness of you Energy
Management strategy.  Connect your Remote Monitoring Server to the data
coming in from your Automated Meter Reading or Smart Metering so you can
compare the data to the rest of the data you are capturing.  You will
have a clear picture of how much energy you are using to achieve your
Energy Management strategy.

9.11 Scenario 11 - Smart Metering
=================================

Smart Metering (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_meter) is not the
same as Automated Meter Reading
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_meter_reading).  They are both
part of Advanced Metering Infrastructure
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_meter#Advanced_metering_infrastructure).
Smart Metering has much more capability than Automated Meter Reading.
Suffice it to say, if you are going to implement either of these
technologies, it only makes sense to be able to do something with all of
the data.  Responding by changing your HVAC system, as appropriate,
helps to increase the effectiveness of you Energy Management strategy.
Connect your Remote Monitoring Server to the data coming in from your
Automated Meter Reading or Smart Metering so you can compare the data to
the rest of the data you are capturing.  You will have a clear picture
of how much energy you are using to achieve your Energy Management
strategy.

9.12 Scenario 12 - Utility Providers
====================================

This provider has decided to offer an Energy Management service to their
customer.  They have thousands and thousands of customers.  They need a
way to help their customer manage their thermostat device for generating
heating and cooling, but also maintain air flow in their residential and
commercial facilities.  This provider also needs to improve their
ability to monitor energy consumption, plan for energy manufacturing,
and manage emergencies such as roaming Brownouts
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brownout_%28electricity%29) caused by
storms and other catastrophic events.  Please see the section *Usage
Recommendations* for more information.

   Turning off all power to the HVAC system as a whole removes the
ability of the HVAC fan to circulate air and maintain air flow.  This
defeats the Energy Management strategy, as circulating some amount of
air necessary for a variety of reasons.  Perhaps most importantly,
Environmental Health and Safety
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environmental_Health_and_Safety) has
different ventilation requirements for residential, commercial, and
industrial facilities.

   This provider has a two-part offering to their customers.  First, the
provider uses GNU remotecontrol to do more than just turn off the
electricity, water, or fuel to the HVAC unit.  They are now capable of
providing either heating or cooling adjustments while having the HVAC
fan circulate air, or only circulate air without a heating or cooling
adjustment.  This combination of options now available are much more
than turning off the entire HVAC unit.  Second, the provider also uses
Smart Metering to connect HVAC usage with energy meter readings to log
readings on an hourly basis.  This combined offering provides for better
control and usage of energy resources, HVAC resources, and visibility to
understand customer energy usage.  Energy usage as the billing cycle
progresses and historically, of course.  Imagine how happy the customer
will be to be able to see this granular level of detailed billing.

9.13 Summary
============

There is no single reason to implement GNU remotecontrol.  The reasoning
is often multiple and overlapping.  All of these reasons help to
decrease your costs and increase your comfort level.  Think locally and
globally, and you will easily see there is more good reasoning to use
GNU remotecontrol than ever considered before.

10 Implementation Cost
**********************

The GNU remotecontrol framework leverages already existing Information
Technologies of a Data Network, Web Server with a complete Operating
System, Database Server, Remote Monitoring Server, and Email Server.
The cost to implement GNU remotecontrol is then reduced to the following
ordered list:

  1. Labor to obtain and prepare GNU remotecontrol.
  2. Labor to configure your already existing Information Technologies.
  3. Purchase cabling to run from your data network to your IP enabled
     thermostat device.
  4. Labor to install cabling from your data network to your IP enabled
     thermostat device.
  5. Purchase IP enabled thermostat device.
  6. Purchase a power supply for IP enabled thermostat device.
  7. Labor to install IP enabled thermostat device.
  8. Labor to install power supply for IP enabled thermostat device.
  9. Labor to configure IP enabled thermostat device.

   It is highly recommended you choose external sensors for your IP
enabled thermostat device having pre-wired cabling long enough to reach
where you need the external sensor to reside.  Adding in more cable
between a device and an external sensor is often problematic.  Mixing
different cable types, in either quality of cable or type of
cable.....or both.....often result with problems to having accurate
sensor readings.  This pre-wired cabling, per manufacturer design and
intent of their sensor, decreases the likelihood of the sensor resulting
with skewed metrics.  Most external sensors are extremely touchy.  This
is a good thing, as it provides you with accurate metrics.  However,
proper cable selection of an external sensor is paramount to proper
metrics.  Go with the option of a manufacturer having enough cable
as-built to meet your needs and not splicing on additional cable.

   Finally, consider the benefit of connecting your external sensor
directly to your IP enabled thermostat device, provided the IP enabled
thermostat device can accept it.  The benefit of sensor averaging is
highly valuable to improving system performance.  A direct connection to
the IP enabled thermostat device also eliminates the need for another
power supply to operate the external sensor.

   The cost to implement GNU remotecontrol, in comparison with a lesser
Energy Management strategy for any HVAC system, justifies the completion
of a Cost Benefit Analysis
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost%E2%80%93benefit_analysis) to
determine if GNU remotecontrol is appropriate for your circumstances.
Most likely, it is.

11 Roadmap
**********

The working list of action items for GNU remotecontrol is posted in the
*TODO.txt* file.  This file is located in the
'/PATH-TO-YOUR-SVN/remotecontrol/doc/' directory.  These action items
are specific changes we decide to accomplish and release in future
versions.  Each action item is loaded as either a Bug
(http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=remotecontrol) or Task
(https://savannah.gnu.org/task/?group=remotecontrol) into our GNU
Savannah section (http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/remotecontrol/).  The
GNU remotecontrol Road Map is planned for and limited by the following
boundaries.

11.1 Interoperability
=====================

The Future of GNU remotecontrol is a commitment to international
standards and protocols for Information Technology to provide
availability, relevance, transparency, and maintenance of the GNU
remotecontrol framework.  The BACnet XML Working Group
(http://www.bacnet.org/WG/XML/index.html) is an excellent example of
these attributes.

11.2 HVAC Original Equipment Manufacturer - Feature Addition
============================================================

OEM's now often have the feature of IP enablement.  The benefits for
OEM's to add IP enablement to their thermostat device product offering
far outweigh any hindrance from remaining a standalone device.  Examples
of these benefits include interoperability, furthered Energy Management
strategies, and increased customer satisfaction from the new capability
of remote access to their thermostat device.

11.3 HVAC Aftermarket Equipment Manufacturer - Feature Addition
===============================================================

AEM's have added the feature of IP enablement in the past with limited
success.  This is mostly due to the dependency on another piece of
proprietary technology to handle translation of some proprietary
technology to the data network for the thermostat device.  The
proprietary aspect of the technology will often bottleneck the success
of this technology.  The success of the thermostat device as a
complimentary good is well-proven.  There are hundreds of different
programmable thermostat devices for sale at both the local home supply
stores and globally.  Proper selection of any aftermarket product or
service is critical to the success of the primary product being
supplemented.  A simple example of this scenario is selecting the
different parts to enhance an engine for an automobile, or a boat, or a
snow mobile, et cetera.  Aftermarket Equipment Manufacturers must
demonstrate they have in their offering the capability to not damage the
existing primary product.  Specifically, a heating and cooling system.
There must also be solid proof their offering enhances system
performance by adding additional feature or benefit combinations.
Finally, their offering must be constructed to meet manufacturing
directives, such as RoHS (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ROHS).

11.4 Cost Benefit Analysis
==========================

The outcome of your Cost Benefit Analysis
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost%E2%80%93benefit_analysis) will help
you see your Return on Investment
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rate_of_return) (ROI). This will probably
be the bottom line to the success of GNU remotecontrol for you.
Additionally, consider your Return on Assets
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Return_on_assets) (ROA) as you consider
your cost and benefits.

   The Retro Commission
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_service_company#Retro-commissioning)
(RCx) of any facility, small or large, is best evaluated by.....*is it
worth it*?  Even Testing-Adjusting-Balancing
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Testing_Adjusting_Balancing) a system is
well worth the time and effort, to make sure your system is setup as
suitable for your needs and wants.  The answer to this ROI question
mandates completing several different calculations to make this
determination.  The answer to this ROA question mandates defining how
your investment is considered an asset.

   New construction does not require as many calculations to understand
costs, but often mandates different aspects to be evaluated and then
calculated.  Don't forget to add in the costs and savings of Information
Technology.  This list includes system design, capital expenditures, and
system operation.  This is identified as IT Cost Transparency
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IT_cost_transparency).  Then, don't forget
to add in your End User costs and savings for training and system
operation.  This is identified as Human Resource Accounting
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_resource_accounting).

   Not every facility must have a complete set of calculations to know
what you need to do for your Energy Management strategy.  Consider
simple advice on best practices offered by your *qualified* Decision
Makers to help you select what is best for you.  Regardless of what you
choose for your Energy Management strategy, have a plan.....work the
plan.....review and revise your plan, as appropriate.

   The cost to implement GNU remotecontrol, in comparison with a lesser
Energy Management strategy for any HVAC system, justifies the completion
of a Cost Benefit Analysis to determine if GNU remotecontrol is
appropriate for your circumstances.  Most likely, it is.

12 REFERENCE
************

12.1 Cabling 101
================

12.1.1 Introduction
-------------------

The intent of this writing is *not* to make you an expert in cabling
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cable).  The intent is to provide you with
the necessary reference information, tips, and recommendations for you
to wisely use cabling.  There is no, repeat.....no substitute for hands
on experience with cabling.

   Please carefully read all of this information before you attempt your
cabling efforts.  Experience is a great teacher, so don't be afraid or
discouraged if you mix up wiring patterns or do not suitably terminate
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_termination) a connection with
the proper amount of pressure on a wire connector as you begin your
cabling efforts.

12.1.2 Cable
------------

A wire is a single conductor.  A cable is a group of two or more
insulated conductors.  Category 5 cable
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category_5_cable) is available in many
forms.  The cable is solid core 24-AWG
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_wire_gauge).  8 separately
jacketed wires, twisted in pairs, making 4 pairs all contained within a
protective jacket.  The jacket wrapping around the cable is either
Plenum (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plenum_cable) or Non-Plenum.
Plenum cable is rated for a fire hazard area.  Category 5 cabling is
often rated as low-voltage (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low_voltage),
meaning you do not need a license to install the cable.  Please contact
your local fire authority for more information.

12.1.3 Grounding
----------------

Proper cable grounding is essential for safety.  The assumption the
cable carries a low amount of voltage is true, but it also carries
enough capability to damage the equipment connected together via your
cable and you.....the cabling person.  The differences between
surge-suppression (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surge_suppression) and
transient-voltage-suppression
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transient-voltage-suppression_diode)
cannot be stated enough.  Please contact your local fire authority for
more information.

12.1.4 Installation
-------------------

Category 5 cable is installed in either electrical conduit
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_conduit), cable trays
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cable_tray), or J-Hooks
(https://www.google.com/search?q=j-hooks).  Cable must, must, must be
properly supported to prevent stretching the copper wire and cause small
breaks in the wire.  Small wire breaks cause for performance issues in
quality-of-service (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_of_service),
and lead to a complete breakage in one or more wires.  Cable is laid out
in a pattern of either a main distribution frame
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_distribution_frame) or an
intermediate distribution frame
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intermediate_distribution_frame).

12.1.5 Termination
------------------

Properly installed cable is then connected with some type of registered
jack -and- plug (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Registered_jack).  This
end result is called a cable termination or a wire termination.

12.1.6 Testing
--------------

All cabling must have continuity
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuity_test) all of the time.  A
simple cable tester (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cable_tester) is
probably the most manageable continuity tester
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuity_tester) there is after cable
has been terminated with a registered jack and plug to determine if you
have continuity.  If you have nothing else to test with, connecting two
bare wires together with a wire nut
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wire_nut) on one end, then testing the
other ends with a multi-meter (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multimeter)
is always an option.  This is quite valuable after cable has been laid
in place and you want to know if it has continuity before terminating
the cable.

12.1.7 Usage Notes
------------------

   * You have the probability of good quality-of-service
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_of_service) after cable is
     properly installed, but it is not guaranteed.  Wise planning of
     your installation is paramount to not having problems related to
     cabling.
   * Most cable installations go through some type of usage change
     during the lifecycle of the cable.  Today, imagine you have a singe
     device connecting to a single port on your data network switch.
     Tomorrow, you may need more devices to connect to the same port on
     that same data network switch.  That means you need to put another
     data network switch into the picture.  Where that additional data
     network switch will reside is the unknown.  Moving more data across
     that same cable means the quality of that cable, and the quality of
     installing that cable, really does matter.  Sure, you can always
     pull more cable.  However, you still need more ports on a data
     network switch that lives somewhere to connect those additional
     devices.  Wise choices for cable installation provides more options
     to choose from, options that can easily increase cost effectiveness
     for owning and operating your equipment.
   * Your continuity tester will help you see when you have the proper
     wiring pattern and the proper amount of pressure on a wire
     termination.
   * A majority of the cables manufacturers post a required a minimum
     bend radius for their cable of, "_four times the diameter_" to
     avoid problems.  A cable loop that is too small results in nothing
     more than broken cable.  Small wire breaks cause for performance
     issues in quality-of-service.  It is not worth installing lesser
     quality cable that will cause you problems, nor is it worth
     installing good cable in a way that will cause you problems.  Plan
     your installation and you will have years of satisfaction from your
     cable.
   * Pull some extra cable, loop it in a circle, and wire tie the cable
     loop together.  That provides for moving terminated cable a bit if
     necessary, and provides extra cable should you mix up things when
     you terminate the cable and need to correct the termination.
   * The satisfaction from installing your own cable is great, indeed.
     The cost of installing your own cable is sometimes best paid for
     through a cabling company.  Count the cost and choose either your
     own labor or labor from a cabling company that best suits you
     requirements.
   * Remember, quality-of-service
     (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_of_service) is only possible
     after cable is properly installed.

12.1.8 Cautionary
-----------------

Whatever you do, always install your cable as required by your fire
authority and always, always, always properly support your cable with
either electrical conduit, cable trays, or J-Hooks.  Suffice it to say,
cable that is not properly supported will eventually have small cracks
in the wire, resulting in a quality-of-service
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quality_of_service) loss, progressing to
intermittent continuity problems, and ultimately completely break the
wire somewhere within the cable jacket.

12.2 Power over Ethernet (PoE) 101
==================================

12.2.1 Introduction
-------------------

Power over Ethernet (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_over_Ethernet)
is quite possibly the best thing to come along to the Information
Technology world of hardware since the 1980's.  Literally, it is that
wonderful!  The essence of PoE is you can use cable that is rated as
low-voltage (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low_voltage) to power a
multitude of PoE hardware devices
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_over_Ethernet#Uses).  The list of
what is capable of PoE is constantly growing.  Here are some common PoE
terms to understand.

12.2.2 Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE)
-------------------------------------

The PSE
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_over_Ethernet#Power_sourcing_equipment)
is the network PoE element that inserts power onto a Category 5 cable.
It may be an endspan device, such as a PoE-enabled data network switch,
or a midspan device located between the data network switch and the
Powered Device (PD).

12.2.3 Powered Device (PD)
--------------------------

A PD (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_over_Ethernet#Powered_device)
is the PoE capable device that receives power over Category 5 cable.  It
could be a PoE-enabled IP telephone, a Wireless Access Point, an IP
enabled HVAC thermostat, any other IP device that needs electrical
power.

12.2.4 Midspan
--------------

A midspan device is a PSE that inserts power onto the Category 5 cable.
It is situated between the data network switch and the PD. Typically,
midspan devices are added to existing networks to allow the use of
PoE-enabled PD's.

12.2.5 Endspan
--------------

An endspan device is typically a data network switch that incorporates
PoE capabilities.  Endspan devices often are implemented when a new
network is created, to avoid adding both midspan devices and a data
network switch.

12.2.6 Usage Notes
------------------

Now, should you need or want to move a device such as a Wireless Access
Point, an IP telephone, or an HVAC sensor to another
location.....imagine how nice it would be to not have to juggle the
powering of that device.  There are many combination
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_over_Ethernet#Powering_devices)
options available for PoE capable hardware.

   Pressing onward, imagine a device is locked up and you need to power
the device off and then turn it back on.  Walking to that device could
be a hassle, and could require opening a lot of access panels.  Using
PoE, you can turn off the power over your data network and then turn it
back on.

   The thing for you with PoE is you need to determine how much
electrical power you need.  This amount will tell you what specification
you need to comply with.  The manufacturer of the PoE device will tell
you what standards they are compatible with.  From there, buy the PoE
supply.  Your selection is either a simple single-port power injector
(Midspan), or a rack-mounted
(http://www.microsemi.com/products/powerdsine) midspan power injector,
or buy new data network switches that have PoE built-in as an integrated
feature (Endspan).  Count the cost and choose as best suits you.

   The biggest benefit of PoE is you have the ability to have a better
handle on your surge-suppression
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surge_suppression) and
transient-voltage-suppression
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transient-voltage-suppression_diode)
efforts.  This is because you so chose to install your cabling as
recommended.  Running a wire as an extension off of an HVAC unit, or a
wall outlet, to supply electricity to power the PoE capable hardware,
without also providing proper protection for that PoE hardware, is
absolutely and positively nothing but trouble.  That trouble often shows
up as electrical damage in the form of peculiar performance of the
hardware, or even hardware failure.

12.2.7 Cautionary
-----------------

Here is a strong and simple example of why powering your IP enabled
thermostat device from an HVAC unit is a bad idea.

   The drain line on the HVAC unit somehow gets blocked.  This triggers
the float switch (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Float_switch) to prevent
flooding and that powers down the whole system.  The thermostat has then
been turned off due to the absence of power to the thermostat.  The same
is true if you power your IP enabled thermostat device from your HVAC
and not PoE. *That means you will be unable to access your IP enabled
thermostat device from your data network*.

   You can also hook your float switch to your IP enabled thermostat
device, as an external information sensor, and know when that float
switch is activated via Remote Monitoring.  Power over Ethernet is a
really.....really.....good idea.

   Whatever you do, always use cable safely.  Please contact your local
fire authority for more information.

13 Contributors
***************

Stephen Dawson (https://savannah.gnu.org/users/shdawson), Robbin
Tallent, Robert Vincent, Michael Jacoby, Travis Paul, Virgilio Lino,
John Elliot V, Esteban Monge, Wensheng Xie, Federico Daguerre, Vinicius
Madureira, Jagadees S., and a host of other people.  Their contribution
is both respected and appreciated.

Appendix A GNU Free Documentation License
*****************************************

                      Version 1.2, November 2002

     Copyright (C) 2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
     51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301, USA

     Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
     of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

  0. PREAMBLE

     The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
     functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to
     assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it,
     with or without modifying it, either commercially or
     noncommercially.  Secondarily, this License preserves for the
     author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not
     being considered responsible for modifications made by others.

     This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
     works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.
     It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
     license designed for free software.

     We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for
     free software, because free software needs free documentation: a
     free program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms
     that the software does.  But this License is not limited to
     software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless
     of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book.  We
     recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is
     instruction or reference.

  1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

     This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium,
     that contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can
     be distributed under the terms of this License.  Such a notice
     grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration,
     to use that work under the conditions stated herein.  The
     "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work.  Any member
     of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you".  You accept
     the license if you copy, modify or distribute the work in a way
     requiring permission under copyright law.

     A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
     Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
     modifications and/or translated into another language.

     A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section
     of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
     publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall
     subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could
     fall directly within that overall subject.  (Thus, if the Document
     is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not
     explain any mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of
     historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or
     of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position
     regarding them.

     The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose
     titles are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the
     notice that says that the Document is released under this License.
     If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it
     is not allowed to be designated as Invariant.  The Document may
     contain zero Invariant Sections.  If the Document does not identify
     any Invariant Sections then there are none.

     The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are
     listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice
     that says that the Document is released under this License.  A
     Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may
     be at most 25 words.

     A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
     represented in a format whose specification is available to the
     general public, that is suitable for revising the document
     straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed
     of pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely
     available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text
     formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats
     suitable for input to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise
     Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of markup, has
     been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by
     readers is not Transparent.  An image format is not Transparent if
     used for any substantial amount of text.  A copy that is not
     "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

     Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
     ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format,
     SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming
     simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification.
     Examples of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG.
     Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be read and
     edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which
     the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and
     the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word
     processors for output purposes only.

     The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
     plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the
     material this License requires to appear in the title page.  For
     works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title
     Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the
     work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

     A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document
     whose title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses
     following text that translates XYZ in another language.  (Here XYZ
     stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such as
     "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".)
     To "Preserve the Title" of such a section when you modify the
     Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ" according
     to this definition.

     The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice
     which states that this License applies to the Document.  These
     Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in
     this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other
     implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and
     has no effect on the meaning of this License.

  2. VERBATIM COPYING

     You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
     commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
     copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License
     applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you
     add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You
     may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading
     or further copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However,
     you may accept compensation in exchange for copies.  If you
     distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow the
     conditions in section 3.

     You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above,
     and you may publicly display copies.

  3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

     If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly
     have printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and
     the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must
     enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all
     these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and
     Back-Cover Texts on the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly
     and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies.  The
     front cover must present the full title with all words of the title
     equally prominent and visible.  You may add other material on the
     covers in addition.  Copying with changes limited to the covers, as
     long as they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these
     conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other respects.

     If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
     legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
     reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto
     adjacent pages.

     If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document
     numbering more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable
     Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with
     each Opaque copy a computer-network location from which the general
     network-using public has access to download using public-standard
     network protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free
     of added material.  If you use the latter option, you must take
     reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque
     copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will
     remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one
     year after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or
     through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.

     It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of
     the Document well before redistributing any large number of copies,
     to give them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the
     Document.

  4. MODIFICATIONS

     You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document
     under the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you
     release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the
     Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing
     distribution and modification of the Modified Version to whoever
     possesses a copy of it.  In addition, you must do these things in
     the Modified Version:

       A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title
          distinct from that of the Document, and from those of previous
          versions (which should, if there were any, be listed in the
          History section of the Document).  You may use the same title
          as a previous version if the original publisher of that
          version gives permission.

       B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or
          entities responsible for authorship of the modifications in
          the Modified Version, together with at least five of the
          principal authors of the Document (all of its principal
          authors, if it has fewer than five), unless they release you
          from this requirement.

       C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
          Modified Version, as the publisher.

       D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

       E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
          adjacent to the other copyright notices.

       F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license
          notice giving the public permission to use the Modified
          Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in
          the Addendum below.

       G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant
          Sections and required Cover Texts given in the Document's
          license notice.

       H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.

       I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title,
          and add to it an item stating at least the title, year, new
          authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on the
          Title Page.  If there is no section Entitled "History" in the
          Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and
          publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add
          an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the
          previous sentence.

       J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document
          for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and
          likewise the network locations given in the Document for
          previous versions it was based on.  These may be placed in the
          "History" section.  You may omit a network location for a work
          that was published at least four years before the Document
          itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers
          to gives permission.

       K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
          Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section
          all the substance and tone of each of the contributor
          acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.

       L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered
          in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers or the
          equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.

       M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements".  Such a section
          may not be included in the Modified Version.

       N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled
          "Endorsements" or to conflict in title with any Invariant
          Section.

       O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.

     If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
     appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no
     material copied from the Document, you may at your option designate
     some or all of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their
     titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's
     license notice.  These titles must be distinct from any other
     section titles.

     You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
     nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
     parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text
     has been approved by an organization as the authoritative
     definition of a standard.

     You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text,
     and a passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of
     the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage
     of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
     through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document
     already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added
     by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on
     behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old
     one, on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added
     the old one.

     The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this
     License give permission to use their names for publicity for or to
     assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

  5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

     You may combine the Document with other documents released under
     this License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for
     modified versions, provided that you include in the combination all
     of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents,
     unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your
     combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all
     their Warranty Disclaimers.

     The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
     multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
     copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
     but different contents, make the title of each such section unique
     by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the
     original author or publisher of that section if known, or else a
     unique number.  Make the same adjustment to the section titles in
     the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the
     combined work.

     In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled
     "History" in the various original documents, forming one section
     Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled
     "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications".  You
     must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements."

  6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

     You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other
     documents released under this License, and replace the individual
     copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
     that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the
     rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents
     in all other respects.

     You may extract a single document from such a collection, and
     distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert
     a copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow this
     License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that
     document.

  7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

     A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other
     separate and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a
     storage or distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the
     copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the
     legal rights of the compilation's users beyond what the individual
     works permit.  When the Document is included in an aggregate, this
     License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate which
     are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

     If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
     copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half
     of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed
     on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the
     electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic
     form.  Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket
     the whole aggregate.

  8. TRANSLATION

     Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
     distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section
     4.  Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
     permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
     translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
     original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
     translation of this License, and all the license notices in the
     Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also
     include the original English version of this License and the
     original versions of those notices and disclaimers.  In case of a
     disagreement between the translation and the original version of
     this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will
     prevail.

     If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements",
     "Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to
     Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the
     actual title.

  9. TERMINATION

     You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
     except as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other
     attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is
     void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this
     License.  However, parties who have received copies, or rights,
     from you under this License will not have their licenses terminated
     so long as such parties remain in full compliance.

  10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

     The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of
     the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
     versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
     differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
     <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/>.

     Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version
     number.  If the Document specifies that a particular numbered
     version of this License "or any later version" applies to it, you
     have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
     that specified version or of any later version that has been
     published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.  If the
     Document does not specify a version number of this License, you may
     choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free
     Software Foundation.

ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
====================================================

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and license
notices just after the title page:

       Copyright (C)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
       Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
       under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
       or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
       with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
       Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
       Free Documentation License''.

   If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover
Texts, replace the "with...Texts."  line with this:

         with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with
         the Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts
         being LIST.

   If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other
combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the
situation.

   If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free
software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit
their use in free software.

